above mine. In that second, I saw in his expression the realization that
Elza was attacking him.

Whatever his emotions, like a flash he acted. His grip on my throat
loosened. His arm, swinging backward, warded off Elza's trembling,
hesitant blow. The metal block, intended for his head, was knocked from
her hand; it fell clattering to the floor. And reaching over, Tarrano
gripped the vehicle's control lever, wrenched it bodily from its
fastenings! Control of the vehicle was irrevocably lost! We were
falling!

Breathless moments! Tarrano idly stood apart; his face a mask. My breath
restored, I was recovering. I drew myself erect.

Death! But my confused thoughts went to Elza. Her flying mechanism was
partially sustaining; my own probably was still effective. Before
Tarrano was aware of my purpose, I had pushed Elza forcibly through the
doorway. Into the rush of air her figure disappeared. But Tarrano
gripped me as I tried to follow her. Gripped me and clung. A breathless,
dizzy instant. Locked together, our bodies shifted crazily. I
tried to get him out the doorway with me, but he fought against
it.... Smiling--always smiling....

Elza fell safely. But they told me that Tarrano and I hovered for days
unconscious on the borderland between life and death, living finally,
for our vehicle had plunged into a tremendous snow-bank, to break its
fall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Last scene of all ... They would not have Tarrano on any of the three
worlds. While still living, the very personality of him was a menace.
With his woman Tara, who refused to leave him and whom he tolerated,
they banished him to that tiny asteroid which pursued its solitary way
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.

A lonely, barren little world, with its single, primitive race of
spindly beings--timid, frail beings, half-human, half insect. We took
him there--Maida and Georg, Elza and I. He anticipated his dislike of
the asteroid's slight gravity, and demanded weighted shoes so that he
might walk with the normal feeling of Earth and Venus.

"You give me too much freedom," he told us solemnly.

And there amid the rocks, with Tara we set him down. As we parted, he
turned to Elza. She and I were joined in marriage by then. He faced her,
took one of her hands and pressed its palm to his forehead, the gesture
of homage and respect.

"Goodbye, Lady Elza. I wish for you all life's happiness." He smiled,
but it was a very wistful smile. And then he swung away abruptly.

"Tara! Prepare me food. Leave me--I would be alone." His imperious
gesture dispersed also the crowd of natives who were curiously regarding
him. Here, in his last little domain, he would still be master.

Our vehicle slowly rose. From its windows we watched him. Ignoring us
utterly, weighted down by his heavy shoes, he paced his barren rocks,
head lowered, alone with those thoughts he never shared with anyone.

Tarrano, the Conqueror!


The End.





End of Project Gutenberg's Tarrano the Conqueror, by Raymond King Cummings

