preferring a portion of a loaf to none. Alexander--grim but oddly
peaceful of expression. Brainard--pink-cheeked and emotionless. Kennon
and Copper--happily conscious that it was at last finished. It was an
oddly assorted group of conspirators who planned to restore a segment of
humanity to the human race.

Kennon signed last, and as he did, Alexander looked at him with a sly
grin distorting the smooth pallor of his face.

"You forgot something," he said.

"What?" Kennon said--aware suddenly that something was wrong.

"What do you plan to do, now that this is over?"

"Join the Medical Center here and practice veterinary medicine."

"You wouldn't care to work for me--to help rebuild the wreckage you've
helped create? I'll need a manager on Kardon to phase out the island
while we phase in Phoebe."

"No, thank you. I've had enough of that."

"You just think you have," Alexander said gleefully. "That's what you
have forgotten. You've gotten your agreement--now you will satisfy me.
As I see it you have breached your contract by leaving Flora without
authorization."

"That is right," Kennon said. A small lump of lead began to grow rapidly
larger in his stomach. Brainard was grinning and Copper's eyes were
shining. "You've been jobbed!" his mind told him. He sighed. He knew
what was coming next.

"The punitive clause for breach of contract," Alexander went on
inexorably, "is very broad. Discretion is vested in the entrepreneur. I
can obtain judgment against you in any court on any planet."

"I know," Kennon said glumly.

"But I am going to be civilized," Alexander said. "I am going to be
merciful. I am going to extend your contract until phase-out has been
completed. You are going to have control of the entire Kardon phase of
the operation. It's poetic justice--you made the mess--now you can clean
it up."

"That's inhuman!"

"Humanity has nothing to do with it. It's justice," Alexander said. He
smiled at Copper's radiant face. The thought of going home was good to
her. "Good luck on your new job, Dr. Kennon," he said. "And welcome to
the brotherhood of the ulcer."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lani People, by J. F. Bone

