Tarascus twisted his neck and glared over the plain. The remnants of the
Nemedian host were flying across the stone bridge with swarms of
victorious Aquilonians at their heels, smiting with fury of glutted
vengeance. Bossonians and Gundermen were swarming through the camp of
their enemies, tearing the tents to pieces in search of plunder, seizing
prisoners, ripping open the baggage and upsetting the wagons.

Tarascus cursed fervently, and then shrugged his shoulders, as well as
he could, under the circumstances.

'Very well. I have no choice. What are your demands?'

'Surrender to me all your present holdings in Aquilonia. Order your
garrisons to march out of the castles and towns they hold, without their
arms, and get your infernal armies out of Aquilonia as quickly as
possible. In addition you shall return all Aquilonians sold as slaves,
and pay an indemnity to be designated later, when the damage your
occupation of the country has caused has been properly estimated. You
will remain as hostage until these terms have been carried out.'

'Very well,' surrendered Tarascus. 'I will surrender all the castles and
towns now held by my garrisons without resistance, and all the other
things shall be done. What ransom for my body?'

Conan laughed and removed his foot from his foe's steel-clad breast,
grasped his shoulder and heaved him to his feet. He started to speak,
then turned to see Hadrathus approaching him. The priest was as calm and
self-possessed as ever, picking his way between rows of dead men and
horses.

Conan wiped the sweat-smeared dust from his face with a blood-stained
hand. He had fought all through the day, first on foot with the pikemen,
then in the saddle, leading the charge. His surcoat was gone, his armor
splashed with blood and battered with strokes of sword, mace and ax. He
loomed gigantically against a background of blood and slaughter, like
some grim pagan hero of mythology.

'Well done, Hadrathus!' quoth he gustily. 'By Crom, I am glad to see
your signal! My knights were almost mad with impatience and eating their
hearts out to be at sword-strokes. I could not have held them much
longer. What of the wizard?'

'He has gone down the dim road to Acheron,' answered Hadrathus. 'And
I--I am for Tarantia. My work is done here, and I have a task to perform
at the temple of Mitra. All our work is done here. On this field we have
saved Aquilonia--and more than Aquilonia. Your ride to your capital will
be a triumphal procession through a kingdom mad with joy. All Aquilonia
will be cheering the return of their king. And so, until we meet again
in the great royal hall--farewell!'

Conan stood silently watching the priest as he went. From various parts
of the field knights were hurrying toward him. He saw Pallantides,
Trocero, Prospero, Servius Galannus, their armor splashed with crimson.
The thunder of battle was giving way to a roar of triumph and acclaim.
All eyes, hot with strife and shining with exultation, were turned
toward the great black figure of the king; mailed arms brandished
red-stained swords. A confused torrent of sound rose, deep and
thunderous as the sea-surf: '_Hail, Conan, king of Aquilonia!_'

Tarascus spoke.

'You have not yet named my ransom.'

Conan laughed and slapped his sword home in its scabbard. He flexed his
mighty arms, and ran his blood-stained fingers through his thick black
locks, as if feeling there his re-won crown.

'There is a girl in your seraglio named Zenobia.'

'Why, yes, so there is.'

'Very well.' The king smiled as at an exceedingly pleasant memory. 'She
shall be your ransom, and naught else. I will come to Belverus for her
as I promised. She was a slave in Nemedia, but I will make her queen of
Aquilonia!'





End of Project Gutenberg's The Hour of the Dragon, by Robert E. Howard

