across the narrow strip of water. With the first glimmer of light,
the two aerial fleets took the air, the war-balloons in a long line
over the van of the Moslem army, and the air-ships spread out in a
semicircle to the southward. The hour of prayer was allowed to pass
in peace, and then the work of death began. The war-balloons moved
slowly forward in a straight line at an elevation of four thousand
feet, sweeping the Moslem host from van to rear with a ceaseless hail
of melinite and cyanogen bombs. Great projectiles soared silently up
from the water to the north, and where they fell buildings were torn
to fragments, great holes were blasted into the earth, and every
human being within the radius of the explosion was blown to pieces,
or hurled stunned to the ground. But more mysterious and terrible
than all were the effects of the assault delivered by the air-ships,
which divided into squadrons and swept hither and thither in wide
curves, with the sunlight shining on their silvery hulls and their
long slender guns, smokeless and flameless, hurling the most awful
missiles of all far and wide, over a scene of butchery and horror
that beggared all description.

In vain the gallant Moslems looked for enemies in the flesh to
confront them. None appeared save a few sentinels across the
Bosphorus. And still the work of slaughter went on, pitiless and
passionless as the earthquake or the thunderstorm. Millions of shots
were fired into the air without result, and by the time the rain of
death had been falling without intermission for two hours, an
irresistible panic fell upon the Moslem soldiery. They had never met
enemies like these before, and, brave as lions and yet simple as
children, they looked upon them as something more than human, and
with one accord they flung away their weapons and raised their hands
in supplication to the sky. Instantly the aerial bombardment ceased,
and within an hour East and West had shaken hands, Sultan Mohammed
had accepted the terms of the Federation, and the long warfare of
Cross and Crescent had ceased, as men hoped, for ever.

Then the proclamation was issued disbanding the armies of Britain and
the Federation and the forces of the Sultan. The warships steamed
away westward on their last voyage to the South Atlantic, beneath
whose waves they were soon to sink with all their guns and armaments
for ever. The war-balloons were to be kept for purposes of
transportation of heavy articles to Aeria, while the fleet of
air-ships was to remain the sole effective fighting force in the
world.

While these events were taking place in Europe, those who had been
banished as outcasts from the society of civilised men by the
terrible justice of Natas had been plodding their weary way, in the
tracks of the thousands they had themselves sent to a living grave,
along the Great Siberian Road to the hideous wilderness, in the midst
of which lie the mines of Kara. From the Pillar of Farewells to
Tiumen, from thence to Tomsk,--where they met the first of the
released political exiles returning in a joyous band to their beloved
Russia,--and thence to Irkutsk, and then over the ice of Lake Baikal,
and through the awful frozen desert of the Trans-Baikal Provinces,
they had been driven like cattle until the remnant that had survived
the horrors of the awful journey reached the desolate valley of the
Kara and were finally halted at the Lower Diggings.

Of nearly three hundred strong and well-fed men who had said good-bye
to liberty at the Pillar of Farewells, only a hundred and twenty
pallid and emaciated wretches stood shivering in their rags and
chains when the muster was called on the morning after their arrival
at Kara. Mazanoff and his escort had carried out their part of the
sentence of Natas to the letter. The arctic blasts from the Tundras,
the forced march, the chain and the scourge had done their work, and
more than half the exile-convicts had found in nameless graves along
the road respite from the long horrors of the fate which awaited the
survivors.

The first name called in the last muster was Alexander Romanoff.
"Here," came in a deep hollow tone from the gaunt and ragged wreck of
the giant who twelve months before had been the stateliest figure in
the brilliant galaxy of European Royalty.

"Your sentence is hard labour in the mines for"--The last word was
never spoken, for ere it was uttered the tall and still erect form of
the dethroned Autocrat suddenly shrank together, lurched forward, and
fell with a choking gasp and a clash of chains upon the hard-trampled
snow. A stream of blood rushed from his white, half-open lips, and
when they went to raise him he was dead.

If ever son of woman died of a broken heart it was Alexander
Romanoff, last of the tyrants of Russia. Never had the avenging hand
of Nemesis, though long-delayed, fallen with more precise and
terrible justice. On the very spot on which thousands of his subjects
and fellow-creatures, innocent of all crime save a desire for
progress, had worn out their lives in torturing toil to provide the
gold that had gilded his luxury, he fell as the Idol fell of old in
the temple of Dagon.

He had seen the blasting of his highest hopes in the hour of their
apparent fruition. He had beheld the destruction of his army and the
ruin of his dynasty. He had seen kindred and friends and faithful
servants sink under the nameless horrors of a fate he could do
nothing to alleviate, and with the knowledge that nothing but death
could release them from it, and now at the last moment death had
snatched from him even the poor consolation of sharing the sufferings
of those nearest and dearest to him on earth.

This happened on the 1st of December 1905, at nine o'clock in the
morning. At the same hour Arnold leapt the _Ithuriel_ over the Ridge,
passed down the valley of Aeria like a flash of silver light, and
dropped to earth on the shores of the lake. In the same grove of
palms which had witnessed their despairing betrothal he found Natasha
swinging in a hammock, with a black-eyed six-weeks'-old baby nestling
in her bosom, and her own loveliness softened and etherealised by the
sacred grace of motherhood.

"Welcome, my lord!" she said, with a bright flush of pleasure and the
sweetest smile even he had ever seen transfiguring her beauty, as she
stretched out her hand in welcome at his approach. "Does the King
come in peace?"

"Yes, Angel mine! the empire that you asked for is yours. There is
not a regiment of men under arms in all the civilised world. The last
battle has been fought and won, and so there is peace on earth at
last!"

  THE END

  MORRISON AND GIBB PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.

     *     *     *     *     *

Now Ready, Third Edition.

_308 pages, demy 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s._,

THE CAPTAIN OF THE MARY ROSE.

_A TALE OF TO-MORROW._

By W. LAIRD CLOWES,

U.S. NAVAL INSTITUTE.

With 60 Illustrations by the Chevalier de Martino and Fred. T. Jane.

_A most graphic and enthralling description of the next Naval War
between France and Great Britain._

     *     *     *     *     *

THE FOLLOWING ARE A FEW PRESS OPINIONS.

"Deserves something more than a mere passing notice."--_The Times._

"Full of exciting situations.... Has manifold attractions for all
sorts of readers."--_Army and Navy Gazette._

"The most notable book of the season."--_The Standard._

"A clever book. Mr. Clowes is pre-eminent for literary touch and
practical knowledge of naval affairs."--_Daily Chronicle._

"Mr. W. Laird Clowes' exciting story."--_Daily Telegraph._

"We read 'The Captain of the Mary Rose' at a sitting."--_The Pall
Mall Gazette._

"Written with no little spirit and imagination.... A stirring romance
of the future."--_Manchester Guardian._

"Is of a realistic and exciting character.... Designed to show what
the naval warfare of the future may be."--_Glasgow Herald._

"One of the most interesting volumes of the year."--_Liverpool
Journal of Commerce._

"It is well told and magnificently illustrated."--_United Service
Magazine._

"Full of absorbing interest."--_Engineer's Gazette._

"Is intensely realistic, so much so that after commencing the story
every one will be anxious to read to the end."--_Dundee Advertiser._

"The book is splendidly illustrated."--_Northern Whig._

TOWER PUBLISHING CO. LIMITED,

91 MINORIES, LONDON, E.C.;

_And all Booksellers throughout the Kingdom_.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Angel of the Revolution, by George Griffith

