Ghak took his archers along the enemy's flank, and while the swordsmen
engaged them in front, he poured volley after volley into their
unprotected left.  The Mahars did little real fighting, and were more
in the way than otherwise, though occasionally one of them would fasten
its powerful jaw upon the arm or leg of a Sarian.

The battle did not last a great while, for when Dacor and I led our men
in upon the Sagoth's right with naked swords they were already so
demoralized that they turned and fled before us.  We pursued them for
some time, taking many prisoners and recovering nearly a hundred
slaves, among whom was Hooja the Sly One.

He told me that he had been captured while on his way to his own land;
but that his life had been spared in hope that through him the Mahars
would learn the whereabouts of their Great Secret.  Ghak and I were
inclined to think that the Sly One had been guiding this expedition to
the land of Sari, where he thought that the book might be found in
Perry's possession; but we had no proof of this and so we took him in
and treated him as one of us, although none liked him.  And how he
rewarded my generosity you will presently learn.

There were a number of Mahars among our prisoners, and so fearful were
our own people of them that they would not approach them unless
completely covered from the sight of the reptiles by a piece of skin.
Even Dian shared the popular superstition regarding the evil effects of
exposure to the eyes of angry Mahars, and though I laughed at her fears
I was willing enough to humor them if it would relieve her apprehension
in any degree, and so she sat apart from the prospector, near which the
Mahars had been chained, while Perry and I again inspected every
portion of the mechanism.

At last I took my place in the driving seat, and called to one of the
men without to fetch Dian.  It happened that Hooja stood quite close to
the doorway of the prospector, so that it was he who, without my
knowledge, went to bring her; but how he succeeded in accomplishing the
fiendish thing he did, I cannot guess, unless there were others in the
plot to aid him.  Nor can I believe that, since all my people were
loyal to me and would have made short work of Hooja had he suggested
the heartless scheme, even had he had time to acquaint another with it.
It was all done so quickly that I may only believe that it was the
result of sudden impulse, aided by a number of, to Hooja, fortuitous
circumstances occurring at precisely the right moment.

All I know is that it was Hooja who brought Dian to the prospector,
still wrapped from head to toe in the skin of an enormous cave lion
which covered her since the Mahar prisoners had been brought into camp.
He deposited his burden in the seat beside me.  I was all ready to get
under way.  The good-byes had been said.  Perry had grasped my hand in
the last, long farewell.  I closed and barred the outer and inner
doors, took my seat again at the driving mechanism, and pulled the
starting lever.

As before on that far-gone night that had witnessed our first trial of
the iron monster, there was a frightful roaring beneath us--the giant
frame trembled and vibrated--there was a rush of sound as the loose
earth passed up through the hollow space between the inner and outer
jackets to be deposited in our wake.  Once more the thing was off.

But on the instant of departure I was nearly thrown from my seat by the
sudden lurching of the prospector.  At first I did not realize what had
happened, but presently it dawned upon me that just before entering the
crust the towering body had fallen through its supporting scaffolding,
and that instead of entering the ground vertically we were plunging
into it at a different angle.  Where it would bring us out upon the
upper crust I could not even conjecture.  And then I turned to note the
effect of this strange experience upon Dian.  She still sat shrouded in
the great skin.

"Come, come," I cried, laughing, "come out of your shell.  No Mahar
eyes can reach you here," and I leaned over and snatched the lion skin
from her.  And then I shrank back upon my seat in utter horror.

The thing beneath the skin was not Dian--it was a hideous Mahar.
Instantly I realized the trick that Hooja had played upon me, and the
purpose of it.  Rid of me, forever as he doubtless thought, Dian would
be at his mercy.  Frantically I tore at the steering wheel in an effort
to turn the prospector back toward Pellucidar; but, as on that other
occasion, I could not budge the thing a hair.

It is needless to recount the horrors or the monotony of that journey.
It varied but little from the former one which had brought us from the
outer to the inner world.  Because of the angle at which we had entered
the ground the trip required nearly a day longer, and brought me out
here upon the sand of the Sahara instead of in the United States as I
had hoped.

For months I have been waiting here for a white man to come.  I dared
not leave the prospector for fear I should never be able to find it
again--the shifting sands of the desert would soon cover it, and then
my only hope of returning to my Dian and her Pellucidar would be gone
forever.

That I ever shall see her again seems but remotely possible, for how
may I know upon what part of Pellucidar my return journey may
terminate--and how, without a north or south or an east or a west may I
hope ever to find my way across that vast world to the tiny spot where
my lost love lies grieving for me?


That is the story as David Innes told it to me in the goat-skin tent
upon the rim of the great Sahara Desert.  The next day he took me out
to see the prospector--it was precisely as he had described it.  So
huge was it that it could have been brought to this inaccessible part
of the world by no means of transportation that existed there--it could
only have come in the way that David Innes said it came--up through the
crust of the earth from the inner world of Pellucidar.

I spent a week with him, and then, abandoning my lion hunt, returned
directly to the coast and hurried to London where I purchased a great
quantity of stuff which he wished to take back to Pellucidar with him.
There were books, rifles, revolvers, ammunition, cameras, chemicals,
telephones, telegraph instruments, wire, tools and more books--books
upon every subject under the sun.  He said he wanted a library with
which they could reproduce the wonders of the twentieth century in the
Stone Age and if quantity counts for anything I got it for him.

I took the things back to Algeria myself, and accompanied them to the
end of the railroad; but from here I was recalled to America upon
important business.  However, I was able to employ a very trustworthy
man to take charge of the caravan--the same guide, in fact, who had
accompanied me on the previous trip into the Sahara--and after writing
a long letter to Innes in which I gave him my American address, I saw
the expedition head south.

Among the other things which I sent to Innes was over five hundred
miles of double, insulated wire of a very fine gauge.  I had it packed
on a special reel at his suggestion, as it was his idea that he could
fasten one end here before he left and by paying it out through the end
of the prospector lay a telegraph line between the outer and inner
worlds.  In my letter I told him to be sure to mark the terminus of the
line very plainly with a high cairn, in case I was not able to reach
him before he set out, so that I might easily find and communicate with
him should he be so fortunate as to reach Pellucidar.

I received several letters from him after I returned to America--in
fact he took advantage of every northward-passing caravan to drop me
word of some sort.  His last letter was written the day before he
intended to depart.  Here it is.


MY DEAR FRIEND:

Tomorrow I shall set out in quest of Pellucidar and Dian.  That is if
the Arabs don't get me.  They have been very nasty of late.  I don't
know the cause, but on two occasions they have threatened my life.
One, more friendly than the rest, told me today that they intended
attacking me tonight.  It would be unfortunate should anything of that
sort happen now that I am so nearly ready to depart.

However, maybe I will be as well off, for the nearer the hour
approaches, the slenderer my chances for success appear.

Here is the friendly Arab who is to take this letter north for me, so
good-bye, and God bless you for your kindness to me.

The Arab tells me to hurry, for he sees a cloud of sand to the
south--he thinks it is the party coming to murder me, and he doesn't
want to be found with me.  So good-bye again.

Yours,

DAVID INNES.


A year later found me at the end of the railroad once more, headed for
the spot where I had left Innes.  My first disappointment was when I
discovered that my old guide had died within a few weeks of my return,
nor could I find any member of my former party who could lead me to the
same spot.

For months I searched that scorching land, interviewing countless
desert sheiks in the hope that at last I might find one who had heard
of Innes and his wonderful iron mole.  Constantly my eyes scanned the
blinding waste of sand for the rocky cairn beneath which I was to find
the wires leading to Pellucidar--but always was I unsuccessful.

And always do these awful questions harass me when I think of David
Innes and his strange adventures.

Did the Arabs murder him, after all, just on the eve of his departure?
Or, did he again turn the nose of his iron monster toward the inner
world?  Did he reach it, or lies he somewhere buried in the heart of
the great crust?  And if he did come again to Pellucidar was it to
break through into the bottom of one of her great island seas, or among
some savage race far, far from the land of his heart's desire?

Does the answer lie somewhere upon the bosom of the broad Sahara, at
the end of two tiny wires, hidden beneath a lost cairn?  I wonder.









End of Project Gutenberg's At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

