
       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION


$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the Scientific American, issued monthly--on
the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty large
quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages, forming,
practically, a large and splendid Magazine of Architecture, richly
adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings,
illustrating the most interesting examples of modern Architectural
Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of the
latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the Scientific American. Hundreds
of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans we have
issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building or
improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before them in
this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best examples_
from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have won
for it the Largest Circulation of any Architectural publication in the
world.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of charge,
sent to any address.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS, 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUILDING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.


In connection with the publication of the Building; EDITION of the
Scientific American, Messrs, Munn; & Co. furnish plans and
specifications for buildings' of every kind, including Churches,
Schools, Stores, Dwellings, Carriage Houses, Barns, etc.

In this work they are assisted by able and experienced architects. Full
plans, details, and specifications for the various buildings illustrated
in this paper can be supplied.

Those who contemplate building, or who wish to alter, improve, extend,
or add to existing buildings, I whether wings, porches, bay windows, or
attic rooms, fare invited to communicate with the undersigned. Our work
extends to all parts of the country. Estimates, plans, and drawings
promptly prepared. Terms moderate. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.


Published Weekly. Terms of Subscription, $5 a year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of The Supplement, from the commencement. January
I, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of The Supplement can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50 stitched in
paper, or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

Combined Rates.--One copy of Scientific American and one copy of
Scientific American Supplement, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


USEFUL ENGINEERING BOOKS


Manufacturers, Agriculturists, Chemists, Engineers, Mechanics, Builders,
men of leisure, and professional men, of all classes, need good books in
the line of their respective callings. Our post office department
permits the transmission of books through the mails at very small cost.
A comprehensive catalogue of useful books by different authors, on more
than fifty different subjects, has recently been published, for free
circulation, at the office of this paper. Subjects classified with names
of author. Persons desiring a copy have only to ask for it, and it will
be mailed to them. Address,

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS!


Messrs. Munn & Co., in connection with the publication of the Scientific
American, continue to examine improvements, and to act as Solicitors of
Patents for Inventors.

In this line of business they have had _forty-five years experience_,
and now have _unequaled facilities_ for the preparation of Patent
Drawings, Specifications, and the prosecution of Applications for
Patents in the United States, Canada, and Foreign Countries. Messrs.
Munn & Co. also attend to the preparation of Caveats, Copyrights for
Books, Labels, Reissues, Assignments, and Reports on Infringements of
Patents. All business intrusted to them is done with special care and
promptness, on very reasonable terms.

A pamphlet sent free of charge, on application, containing full
information about Patents and how to procure them; directions concerning
Labels, Copyrights, Designs, Patents, Appeals, Reissues, Infringements,
Assignments, Rejected Cases. Hints on the Sale of Patents, etc.

We also send, _free of charge_, a Synopsis of Foreign Patent Laws,
showing the cost and method of securing patents in all the principal
countries of the world.

MUNN & CO., SOLICITORS OF PATENTS, 361 Broadway, New York.

Branch Offices.--Nos. 622 and 624 F Street, Pacific Building, near 7th
Street, Washington, D.C.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
821, Sep. 26, 1891, by Various

