from _statistics_.

What I do claim is that the mode of determining ratios herein explained is
the only intelligible and scientific one, and the only one proper to
employ in _statistical tabulations_ and _investigations_.

As such, it calls attention to the fact that the amount of insurance
claims met, and of interest receipts, _are limits_ which the corresponding
expenses cannot exceed, certainly for a series of years together, without
making the _expense_ more than the _advantage_ of the business. To keep
this fact in view, _as a preventive of extravagance_, is not the least
valuable service the new mode may render. It may be seen that there are
eight cases in the table, in which the ratio of insurance expense points
to expenses exceeding the insurance claims met in the same time, yet the
reader need not hasten to conclude that the same companies will
permanently show similar ratios, or have no good reasons to give for the
ones which now appear. I may remark, however, that it is an evidence of
the scientific mode in which the figures are presented, that it
facilitates such explanations as are pertinent of any of the ratios.

For instance, some of the ratios are undoubtedly affected by the fact that
the claims for the year of the company in question have been exceptionally
high or low, or that the company (being of recent organization perhaps)
has just incurred exceptional expense to increase its business, the
advantage of which will appear later, etc. But I leave to the companies
themselves to show to what extent such circumstances have affected their
ratios; except that, in regard to the several net rates of interest
earned, it is proper to say that in all cases in which they considerably
exceed the average of 5.42 per cent. it will be found, by referring to the
details of interest receipts reported to the Commissioner, that the excess
is owing to the fact of exceptional profits by the sale of stocks, or
recovery on investments previously reckoned as loss.

WALTER C. WRIGHT.

Medford, Mass., Sept., 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *


A catalogue containing brief notices of many important scientific papers
heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this office.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.


PUBLISHED WEEKLY. Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January 1,
1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in paper,
or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.


MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS.


In connection with the Scientific American, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 39 years' experience,
and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents are obtained
on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the Scientific American of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the Patentee.
By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is directed to the
merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN &
Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats.
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
455, September 20, 1884, by Various

