The reply to my request was a summons to appear before the officer to
whom I had addressed my appeal.  A sergeant came for me along with the
interpreter, and I managed to obtain his permission to let Victory
accompany me--I had never left her alone with the prisoners since we
had been captured.

To my delight I found that the officer into whose presence we were
conducted spoke Abyssinian fluently.  He was astounded when I told him
that I was a Pan-American.  Unlike all others whom I had spoken with
since my arrival in Europe, he was well acquainted with ancient
history--was familiar with twentieth century conditions in Pan-America,
and after putting a half dozen questions to me was satisfied that I
spoke the truth.

When I told him that Victory was Queen of England he showed little
surprise, telling me that in their recent explorations in ancient
Russia they had found many descendants of the old nobility and royalty.

He immediately set aside a comfortable house for us, furnished us with
servants and with money, and in other ways showed us every attention
and kindness.

He told me that he would telegraph his emperor at once, and the result
was that we were presently commanded to repair to Peking and present
ourselves before the ruler.

We made the journey in a comfortable railway carriage, through a
country which, as we traveled farther toward the east, showed
increasing evidence of prosperity and wealth.

At the imperial court we were received with great kindness, the emperor
being most inquisitive about the state of modern Pan-America.  He told
me that while he personally deplored the existence of the strict
regulations which had raised a barrier between the east and the west,
he had felt, as had his predecessors, that recognition of the wishes of
the great Pan-American federation would be most conducive to the
continued peace of the world.

His empire includes all of Asia, and the islands of the Pacific as far
east as 175dW.  The empire of Japan no longer exists, having been
conquered and absorbed by China over a hundred years ago.  The
Philippines are well administered, and constitute one of the most
progressive colonies of the Chinese empire.

The emperor told me that the building of this great empire and the
spreading of enlightenment among its diversified and savage peoples had
required all the best efforts of nearly two hundred years.  Upon his
accession to the throne he had found the labor well nigh perfected and
had turned his attention to the reclamation of Europe.

His ambition is to wrest it from the hands of the blacks, and then to
attempt the work of elevating its fallen peoples to the high estate
from which the Great War precipitated them.

I asked him who was victorious in that war, and he shook his head sadly
as he replied:

"Pan-America, perhaps, and China, with the blacks of Abyssinia," he
said.  "Those who did not fight were the only ones to reap any of the
rewards that are supposed to belong to victory.  The combatants reaped
naught but annihilation.  You have seen--better than any man you must
realize that there was no victory for any nation embroiled in that
frightful war."

"When did it end?" I asked him.

Again he shook his head.  "It has not ended yet.  There has never been
a formal peace declared in Europe.  After a while there were none left
to make peace, and the rude tribes which sprang from the survivors
continued to fight among themselves because they knew no better
condition of society.  War razed the works of man--war and pestilence
razed man.  God give that there shall never be such another war!"

You all know how Porfirio Johnson returned to Pan-America with John
Alvarez in chains; how Alvarez's trial raised a popular demonstration
that the government could not ignore.  His eloquent appeal--not for
himself, but for me--is historic, as are its results.  You know how a
fleet was sent across the Atlantic to search for me, how the
restrictions against crossing thirty to one hundred seventy-five were
removed forever, and how the officers were brought to Peking, arriving
upon the very day that Victory and I were married at the imperial court.

My return to Pan-America was very different from anything I could
possibly have imagined a year before.  Instead of being received as a
traitor to my country, I was acclaimed a hero.  It was good to get back
again, good to witness the kindly treatment that was accorded my dear
Victory, and when I learned that Delcarte and Taylor had been found at
the mouth of the Rhine and were already back in Pan-America my joy was
unalloyed.

And now we are going back, Victory and I, with the men and the
munitions and power to reclaim England for her queen.  Again I shall
cross thirty, but under what altered conditions!

A new epoch for Europe is inaugurated, with enlightened China on the
east and enlightened Pan-America on the west--the two great peace
powers whom God has preserved to regenerate chastened and forgiven
Europe.  I have been through much--I have suffered much, but I have won
two great laurel wreaths beyond thirty.  One is the opportunity to
rescue Europe from barbarism, the other is a little barbarian, and the
greater of these is--Victory.










End of Project Gutenberg's The Lost Continent, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

