I found that the leaves tasted like those of the common garden mint
(Mentha viridis), and not at all like peppermint, and that therefore
the oil and menthol could not possibly be derived from this plant.

I then asked my friend, Mr. T. Christy, who takes great interest in
medicinal plants, to endeavor to get specimens from Japan of the plant
yielding the oil. After many vain attempts, he at last succeeded in
obtaining live plants. These were cultivated in his garden at Malvern
House, Sydenham, and when they flowered I examined the plant and found
that it differed from other forms of M. arvensis in the taste, in the
acuminate segments of the calyx of the flower, and in the longer leaf
stalks; the leaves also taper more toward the base. Dr. Franchet, the
greatest living authority on Japanese plants, to whom I sent
specimens, confirmed my opinion as to the variety deserving a special
name, and M. Malinvaud, a well known authority on mints, suggested the
name piperascens, which I adopted, calling the plant Mentha arvensis,
var. piperascens. Specimens of the plant kindly lent by Mr. Christy
for the purpose were exhibited by me at an evening meeting of the
Linnaean Society, and by a printer's error in the report of the remarks
then made, the name of the plant appeared in print as Mentha arvensis,
var. purpurascens.

I trust that the present note, through the medium of _The Garden_,
will prevent the perpetuation of this error. This is the more
important, as I hope that the plant will come into cultivation in this
country. It is a robust plant of rapid growth, as easily cultivated as
the English peppermint, and seems to require less moisture, and is
therefore capable of cultivation in a great variety of localities. The
increasing demand for menthol, which can only be procured in small
quantities from the English peppermint, and the high price of English
peppermint oil, lead to the hope that instead of importing menthol
from Japan, it will be prepared in this country from the Japanese
plant.

With the appliances of more advanced civilization, it ought to be
possible for the oil and menthol to be made in this country at less
price than the Japanese products now cost.

At the present time large quantities of cheap peppermint oil are
imported into this country from the United States, and Chinese oil is
imported into Bombay for use in the Government medical stores. There
is no reason why this should be the case if the Japanese plant were
cultivated in this country. In Ireland, where labor is cheap and the
climate moist, this crop might afford a valuable source of income to
enterprising cultivators. It may be interesting to note here that the
plant used in China closely resembles the Japanese one, differing
chiefly in the narrower and more glabrous leaves. I have therefore
named it Mentha arvensis f. glabrata, from specimens sent to me from
Hong Kong, by Mr. C. Ford, the director of the Botanic Gardens there.

E.M. HOLMES.

       *       *       *       *       *




GLADIOLUS.


The gladiolus is easily raised from seeds, which should be sown in
early spring in pots of rich soil placed in heat, the pots being kept
near the glass after they begin to grow, and the plants being
gradually hardened to permit their being placed out of doors in a
sheltered spot for the summer. In October they will have ripened off,
and must be taken out of the soil and stored in paper bags in a dry
room secure from frost. They will have made little bulbs, from the
size of a hazel nut downward, according to their vigor. In the
subsequent spring they should be planted like the old bulbs, and the
larger ones will flower during the season, while the smaller specimens
must be again harvested and planted out as above described.

       *       *       *       *       *


A catalogue containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at
this office.

       *       *       *       *       *


The

Scientific American Supplement.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

      Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
I, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

            MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
          261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 38 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world.
Patents are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all
Inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence
of the Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public
attention is directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or
introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain,
free of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing
to MUNN & CO.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents,
Caveats, Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

      MUNN & CO.. 261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
 Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, Vol.
XV., No. 388, June 9, 1883, by Various

