as about 3 feet apart, and variable.

From estimates which he obtained from other observers of his party,
the distances between the bands varied from 6 to l1/2 feet, but so
quickly did they pass that they baffled all attempts to count even the
number that passed in one second.

He observed the time of continuance of their passage from west to east
as forty-eight seconds, which indicates a width of 33 miles of
diffraction bands stretching outward from the edge of the shadow to
the number of many thousands.

Mr. G.W. Hill, at Denver, a little to the north of the central track
of the shadow, observed the infra or bands within the shadow, alluding
to the fact that they must be moving at the same rate as the shadow,
although their apparent motion was much slower, or like the shadows of
flying clouds. He attributes the discrepancy to optical illusion.

At Virginia City the _colors_ of the _ultra_ bands were observed, and
estimated at five seconds' duration from the edge of the shadow, which
is equal to about 4 miles in width. These are known to be the
strongest color bands in the diffraction spectrum, which accounts for
their being generally observed.

Mr. W.H. Bush, observing at Central City, in a communication to Prof.
Holden alludes to the brilliancy of the colors of these bands as seen
through small clouds floating near the sun's place during totality,
and of the rapid change of their rainbow colors as observed dashing
across the clouds with the rapidity of thought.

All of these bands, both ultra and infra, as seen in optical
experiments, are colored in reverse order, being from violet to red
for each band outward and inward from the edge of the shadow.

It is very probable that the velocity of the passage of all the bands
during a total eclipse very much modifies the distinctness of the
colors or possibly obliterates them by optically blending so as to
produce the dull white and black bands which occupied so large a
portion of this grand panorama.

The phenomenon of these faint colored bands, with the observed light
and dark shadows, may be attributed to one or all of the following
causes:

1. A change in the direction of a small portion of the sun's light
passing by the solid body of the moon, it being deflected outward by
repulsion or reflection from its surface, and other portions being
deflected inward after passing the body by mutual repulsion of its own
elements toward a _light vacuum_ or space devoid of the element of
vibration.

2. The colored spectral bands being the direct result of the property
of interference, or the want of correspondence of the wave lengths due
to divergence; the same phenomenon being also observed in convergent
light. This is practically illustrated in the hazy definition of the
reduced aperture of telescopes, and its peculiarities shown in the
spectral rings within and beyond the focus.

3. Chromatic dispersion by our atmosphere, together with selective
absorption, also by our atmosphere and its vapors, have been suggested
as causes in this curious and complicated phenomena.

In none of the reports descriptive of the phenomena of polarization of
the corona is there the slightest allusion to the influence that the
diffraction bands may possibly have in modifying or producing the
various conditions of polarization observed; although these
observations have been made and commented upon during the past
twenty-five years.

Investigations now in progress of the modifying relation of the
phenomenon of diffraction in its effect upon not only the physical
aspect of the corona, but also in some strange spectroscopic anomalies
that have been observed near the sun at other times than during a
total solar eclipse, will, it is hoped, result in a fuller
interpretation of the physical nature of one of the grandest elements
of creation--_light_; let there be more of it.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CATALOGUE containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at
this office.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Scientific American Supplement.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

      MUNN &. CO., PUBLISHERS,
      361 Broadway, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 39 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world.
Patents are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all
Inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence
of the Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public
attention is directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or
introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain,
free of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing
to MUNN & Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents,
Caveats, Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington. D.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
441, June 14, 1884., by Various

