work is interesting.

  [Footnote 1: La Methode Graphique (Supplement), Paris, 1885.]

The camera consists of a circular brass box, 51/2 inches in diameter and
11/4 inches deep, containing a circular vulcanite shutter with two
apertures, behind which is placed a circular dry plate. Both plate and
shutter are revolved in opposite directions to each other by a simple
arrangement of four cogged wheels moved by a single crank. The box is
perforated at one side by a circular opening, 13/4 inches in diameter,
from the margin of which projects at a right angle a long brass tube
(Fig. 1), which carries the lens. In Fig. 2 the lid of the box has
been removed, and the bottom of the box, with the wheels, springs, and
partially closed shutter, is presented. The lid is double--that is, it
is a flat box in itself. It contains nothing but the dry plate,
supported at its center upon a small brass disk, against which disk it
is firmly pressed by a pivot attached to a spring fastened in the lid.
The aperture in one side of this double lid, which corresponds with
that seen in the floor of the box, may be closed by a slide, so that
the lid containing the plate can be removed like an ordinary plate
holder and carried to a dark room, where it is opened and the plate is
changed. When the lid is replaced this slide is removed, and as the
shutter is made to revolve, the light falls upon whatever portion of
the dry plate happens to be opposite the opening.

By reference to Fig. 2, it will be seen that when the large wheel
which projects outside of the box is revolved by a crank, it turns the
small ratchet wheel, which bears an eccentric pawl. (The crank has
been removed in Fig. 2; it is seen in Fig. 1.) The central wheel has
only six cogs. The pawl is pressed into one of these cogs by a spring.
It pushes the central wheel around one-sixth of its circumference,
when it returns to be pressed into the next cog. While the pawl
returns, it necessarily leaves the central wheel at rest, and whatever
momentum this wheel carries is checked by a simple stop pressed by a
spring upon the opposite side. The central wheel carries a square
axle, which projects through a small hole in the center of the double
lid and fits into the brass disk before alluded to, causing the disk
to revolve with the axle. The disk is covered by rubber cloth; and as
the dry plate is pressed firmly against the rubber surface by the
spring in the lid, the plate adheres to the rubber and revolves with
the disk. Thus every complete revolution of the central wheel in the
floor of the box carries with it the dry plate, stops it, and moves it
on again six times. The velocity of revolution of the plate is only
limited by the rapidity with which one can turn the crank.

The shutter is revolved in the opposite direction by a wheel whose
cogs are seen fitting into those of the little wheel carrying the
eccentric pawl.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--THE CAMERA MOUNTED.]

The two apertures in the shutter are so placed that at the instant of
exposure of the plate it is momentarily at rest, while the plate when
moving is covered by the shutters. This arrangement prevents vibration
of the plate and blurring of the image. The camera is mounted by two
lateral axles with screw clamps upon two iron stands, such as are in
common use in chemical laboratories. A brass rod attached to the tube
steadies it, and allows it to be screwed fast at any angle
corresponding to the angle at which the heart is placed. It is thus
easy to put a manometer tube in the femoral artery of an animal, bend
it up alongside of the exposed heart, and simultaneously photograph
the cardiac contraction and the degree of rise of the fluid in the
manometer(!). The tube is arranged like the draw tube of a microscope.
It is made long, so as to admit of taking small hearts at life-size.
The stand carries a support for the frog or other animal to be
experimented upon, and a bottle of physiological salt solution kept
warm by a spirit lamp beneath.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--INTERIOR OF THE CAMERA.]

The whole apparatus is readily packed in a small space. I have already
taken a number of photographs of various hearts and intestines with
it, and the contraction of the heart of the frog produced by
_Strophanthus hispidus_, the new cardiac stimulant, is seen in Fig. 3,
taken by this new instrument. The apparatus has the great advantage
that six photographs of a single cardiac pulsation, or of any muscular
contraction, may be easily taken in less than one second, or, by
simply turning the crank slower, they may be taken at any desired rate
to keep pace with the rhythm of the heart. The second hand of a watch
may be placed in the field of view and simultaneously photographed
with the heart, so that there can be no question about the series of
photographs all belonging to one pulsation.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE HEART IN MOTION.

1, Normal diastole; 2, auricular systole; 3, ventricular systole. 1,
2, 3 were taken in a half second; 4, 5, 6, same as 1, 2, 3, after
injection of toxic dose of Strophanthus hispidus. 4, 5, 6 were taken
in a half second. The pulse rate was 74.]

I have already called attention[13] to the ease with which these
photographs are enlarged for lecture room demonstration, either on
paper or in a stereopticon, and the ease with which they may be
reproduced in print to illustrate the action of drugs.

[Footnote 13: _Medical Record_, loc. cit.; Recent Advances in Methods
of Studying the Heart, _Medical Press_, Buffalo, March 1, 1886, p.
234; Instantaneous Photographs of the Heart, Johns Hopkins University
Circulars, March, 1886, p. 60.]

       *       *       *       *       *


A CATALOGUE containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at
this office.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50 stitched in
paper, or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES.--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 42 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world.
Patents are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the <b>Scientific American</b> of all
inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence
of the Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public
attention is directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or
introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain,
free of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing
to MUNN & Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents
Caveats, Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
Branch Office, 622 and 624 F St., Washington, D.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
561, October 2, 1886, by Various

