    F-174 FIRST THROUGH TIME by Rex Gordon

    F-178 MORE ADVENTURES ON OTHER PLANETS
          Edited by Donald A. Wollheim


  If you are missing any of these, they can be obtained directly
  from the publisher by sending the indicated sum, plus 5c handling
  fee, to Ace Books, Inc. (Sales Dept.), 1120 Avenue of the
  Americas, New York 36, N.Y.



       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's Note: Typographical errors have been repaired in this text.

  Spelling

    Old: cemetaries
    New: cemeteries

    Old: hefting his repentence sign
    New: hefting his repentance sign

    Old: what happenedt here, old leather
    New: what happened here, old leather

    Old: I suppose, thought I've never even been
    New: I suppose, though I've never even been

    Old: casing aound the powerpacks
    New: casing around the powerpacks

    Old: as staticly blunt as anvils
    New: as statically blunt as anvils

    Old: Rynason knelt beside the set and took the Mike
    New: Rynason knelt beside the set and took the mike

    Old: can repell any further touchdowns
    New: can repel any further touchdowns

    Old: over-hanging shadows of the mounains
    New: over-hanging shadows of the mountains

    Old: collonade
    New: colonnade

    Old: The brain must be eslf-perpetuating
    New: The brain must be self-perpetuating

    Old: their hoplessness,
    New: their hopelessness,

    Old: millenia
    New: millennia

  Punctuation

    Old: Manning's quarters, He met Marc Stoworth
    New: Manning's quarters. He met Marc Stoworth

    Old: daring the man to take offense. He didn't."
    New: daring the man to take offense. He didn't.

    Old: "Where's Mara? Rynason asked.
    New: "Where's Mara?" Rynason asked.

    Old: echo of Horng's screams in his mind
    New: echo of Horng's screams in his mind.

    Old: Manning said. I'm going to throw out
    New: Manning said. "I'm going to throw out

    Old: he said. Tonight I'm busy.
    New: he said. "Tonight I'm busy.

  Missing word

    Old: Rynason that that it was Rene Malhomme
    New: Rynason saw that it was Rene Malhomme



