appearance of Halley's comet was in 1835, and according to
Pontecoulant's calculations, its next perihelion passage will take
place May 24, 1910.

       *       *       *       *       *




LACK OF SUN LIGHT.


Some interesting information as to the way in which the human system
is affected under the peculiar conditions of work in mines has been
furnished by M. Fabre, from experiences connected with the coal mines
of France. He finds that the deprivation of solar light causes a
diminution in the pigment of the skin, and absence of sunburning, but
there is no globular anaemia--that is, diminution in the number of
globules in the blood. Internal maladies seem to be more rare. While
there is no essential anaemia in the miners, the blood globules are
often found smaller and paler than in normal conditions of life, this
being due to respiration of noxious gases, especially where
ventilation is difficult. The men who breathe too much the gases
liberated on explosion of powder or dynamite suffer more than other
miners from affections of the larynx, the bronchia, and the stomach.
Ventilation sometimes works injury by its cooling effect.

       *       *       *       *       *




SYNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS ON THE ARTIFICIAL REPRODUCTION OF
METEORITES.


By means of igneous fusion the authors have succeeded in reproducing
two types of crystalline associations, which, in their mineralogical
composition and the principal features of their structure, are
analogous, if not identical with certain oligosideric meteorites. The
only notable difference results from the habitual brecchoid state of
the meteorites, which contrasts with state of quiet solidification of
the artificial compounds.--_F. Fouque and Michel Levy._

       *       *       *       *       *


A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had
gratis at this office.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the
commencement, January 1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be
supplied. Two volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50,
stitched in paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES.--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and
one copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year,
postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

  MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
  37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & CO. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 35 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world.
Patents are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain,
free of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing
to MUNN & CO.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents,
Caveats, Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured, with hints for
procuring advances on inventions. Address

  MUNN & CO., 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.
Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
315,  January 14, 1882, by Various

