_No. 1. A History of the Science Series_

    The author traces the evolution of intellectual thought in
    the progress of astronomical discovery, recognizing the
    various points of view of the different ages, giving due
    credit even to the ancients. It has been necessary to
    curtail many parts of the history, to lay before the reader
    in unlimited space enough about each age to illustrate its
    tone and spirit, the ideals of the workers, the gradual
    addition of new points of view and of new means of
    investigation.


An Easy Guide to the Constellations

With a Miniature Atlas of the Stars

By James Gall

Author of "The People's Atlas of the Stars," etc.

_New and Enlarged Edition, with 30 Maps 16mo._

    This new edition of _An Easy Guide to the Constellations_
    has been thoroughly revised: five additional plates have
    been added, so as to include all the constellations of the
    Zodiac, and render the book complete for Southern Europe and
    the United States.

  G.P. Putnam's Sons
  New York      London


The Destinies of the Stars

By

Svante Arrhenius

Author of "Worlds in the Making," etc.

_12mo. 26 Illustrations._

    With keenness, brilliancy, and distinguished learning, Dr.
    Arrhenius, a Nobel Prize winner, having had occasion
    repeatedly to treat new questions of a cosmological nature,
    questions largely arisen from new discoveries and
    observations within the scope of astronomy, opens to the
    reader vast new vistas, through the study of the relation of
    the stars to the "Milky Way" and through observations of our
    neighbor planets.

  G.P. Putnam's Sons
  New York      London


  Transcriber's Notes:

    The original text contains many characters that cannot be
    rendered properly in a 7 bit (ascii) version of the text.

  Accented characters markup scheme:

    Accented characters indicate pronunciation. The accented
    character and the symbol representing the accent are surrounded
    with square brackets. Symbols in this text have been placed in
    front of the character as the accents all appear above the
    character.

    Accent      Symbol
    acute         /
    macron        =
    breve         )
    diaresis      :
    circumflex    ^

  Greek characters markup scheme:

    Greek characters indicate specific stars within a given constellation.
    The Greek character has been transcribed and surrounded with square
    brackets. Where the transcription resulted in an accented character
    this character was rendered according to the character markup scheme
    (above) and both sets of square brackets were retained. Example [[^e]].

  Other symbols markup scheme:

    Symbols that represent the various signs of the zodiac were rendered
    according to the following example [Symbol: Gemini]
    The degree symbol is represented by [deg]
    Acute accent as a single character represented by '.
    The ae ligature has been expanded to ae.
    Superscripted characters are preceded by a ^

   Corrections made:
     Page 12 Au iga corrected to Auriga.
     Page 118 preceptible corrected to perceptible.
     Page 148 Oeti corrected to Ceti.
     Page 163 cometimes corrected to sometimes.

   Inconsistencies retained:
     Alphecca and Alphacca.
     Gloria Frederika and Gloria Frederica.
     Bull of Poniatowskio and Bull of Poniatowski.






End of Project Gutenberg's A Field Book of the Stars, by William Tyler Olcott

