He felt his own humility the farther he was allowed to penetrate into
the mysteries of the universe; and sensible of the incompetency of his
unaided powers for such transcendent researches, and recognising himself
as but the instrument which the Almighty employed to make known his
wonders, he never entered upon his inquiries without praying for
assistance from above. This frame of mind was by no means inconsistent
with that high spirit of delight and triumph with which Kepler surveyed
his discoveries. His was the unpretending ovation of success, not the
ostentatious triumph of ambition; and if a noble pride did occasionally
mingle itself with his feelings, it was the pride of being the chosen
messenger of physical truth, not that of being the favoured possessor of
superior genius. With such a frame of mind, Kepler was necessarily a
Christian. The afflictions with which he was beset confirmed his faith
and brightened his hopes: he bore them in all their variety and severity
with Christian patience; and though he knew that this world was to be
the theatre of his intellectual glory, yet he felt that his rest and his
reward could be found only in another.

It is difficult to form any very intelligible idea of the nature and
extent of Kepler's astrological opinions, and of the degree of credit
which he himself placed in the opinions that he did avow. In his
Principles of Astrology, published in 1602, and in other works, he rails
against the vanity and worthlessness of the ordinary astrology. He
regards those who professed it as knaves and charlatans; and maintains
that the planets and stars exercise no influence whatever over human
affairs. He conceives, however, that certain harmonious configurations
of suitable planets, like the spur to a horse, or a speech to an
audience, have the power of exciting the minds of men to certain general
actions or impulses; so that the only effect of these configurations is
to operate along with the vital soul in producing results which would
not otherwise have taken place. As an example of this, he states that
those who are born when many aspects of the planets occur, _generally_
turn out busy and industrious, whether they be occupied in amassing
wealth, managing public affairs, or prosecuting scientific studies.
Kepler himself was born under a triple configuration, and hence, in his
opinion, his ardour and activity in study; and he informs us that he
knew a lady born under nearly the same configurations, "who not only
makes no progress in literature, but troubles her whole family and
occasions deplorable misery to herself." This excitement of the
faculties of sublunary natures, as he expresses it, by the colours and
aspects and conjunctions of the planets, is regarded by Kepler as a
fact, which he had deduced from observation, and which has "compelled
his unwilling belief." "I have been driven to this," says he, "not by
studying or admiring Plato, but singly and solely by observing seasons,
and noting the aspects by which they are produced. I have seen the state
of the atmosphere almost uniformly disturbed as often as the planets are
in conjunction, or in the other configurations so celebrated among
astrologers. I have noticed its tranquil state either when there are
none or few such aspects, or when they are transitory and of short
duration." Had Kepler been able to examine these hasty and erroneous
deductions by long continued observation, he would soon have found that
the coincidence which he did observe was merely accidental, and he would
have cheerfully acknowledged it. Speculations of this kind, however,
are, from their very nature, less subject to a rigorous scrutiny; and a
long series of observations is necessary either to establish or to
overturn them. The industry of modern observers has now supplied this
defect, and there is no point in science more certain than that the sun,
moon, and planets do not exercise any influence on the general state of
our atmosphere.

The philosophers in Kepler's day, who had studied the phenomena of the
tides, without having any idea of their cause, and who observed that
they were clearly related to the daily motions of the two great
luminaries, may be excused for the extravagance of their belief in
supposing that the planets exercised other influences over "sublunary
nature." Although Kepler, in his Commentaries on Mars, had considered it
probable that the waters of our ocean are attracted by the moon, as iron
is by a loadstone, yet this opinion seems to have been a very transient
one, as he long afterwards, in his System of Harmonies, stated his firm
belief that the earth is an enormous living animal, and enumerates even
the analogies between its habits and those of known animated beings. He
considered the tides as waves produced by the spouting out of water
through its gills, and he explains their relation to the solar and lunar
motions by supposing that the terrene monster has, like other animals,
its daily and nightly alternations of sleeping and waking.

From the consideration of Kepler's astrological opinions, it is an
agreeable transition to proceed to the examination of his high merits as
an astronomer and a philosopher. As an experimental philosopher, or as
an astronomical observer, Kepler does not lay claim to our admiration.
He himself acknowledges, "that for observations his sight was dull, and
for mechanical operations his hand was awkward." He suffered much from
weak eyes, and the delicacy of his constitution did not permit him to
expose himself to the night air. Notwithstanding these hindrances,
however, he added several observations to those of Tycho, which he made
with two instruments that were presented to him by his friend Hoffman,
the President of the States of Styria. These instruments were an iron
sextant, 2-1/2 feet in diameter, and a brass azimuthal quadrant 3-1/2 feet in
diameter, both of which were divided into single minutes of a degree.
They were very seldom used, and we must regard the circumstances which
disqualified Kepler for an observer, as highly favourable to the
developement of those great powers which he directed with undivided
energy to physical astronomy.

Even if Kepler had never turned his attention to the heavens, his
optical labours would have given him a high rank among the original
inquirers of his age; but when we consider him also as the discoverer
of the three great laws which bear his name, we must assign him a rank
next to that of Newton. The history of science does not present us with
any discoveries more truly original, or which required for their
establishment a more powerful and vigorous mind. The speculations of his
predecessors afforded him no assistance. From the cumbrous machinery
adopted by Copernicus, Kepler passed, at one step, to an elliptical
orbit, with the sun in one of its foci, and from that moment astronomy
became a demonstrative science. The splendid discoveries of Newton
sprung immediately from those of Kepler, and completed the great chain
of truths which constitute the laws of the planetary system. The
eccentricity and boldness of Kepler's powers form a striking contrast
with the calm intellect and the enduring patience of Newton. The bright
spark which the genius of the one elicited, was fostered by the sagacity
of the other into a steady and a permanent flame.

Kepler has fortunately left behind him a full account of the methods by
which he arrived at his great discoveries. What other philosophers have
studiously concealed, Kepler has openly avowed, and minutely detailed;
and we have no hesitation in considering these details as the most
valuable present that has ever been given to science, and as deserving
the careful study of all who seek to emulate his immortal achievements.
It has been asserted that Newton made his discoveries by following a
different method; but this is a mere assumption, as Newton has never
favoured the world with any account of the erroneous speculations and
the frequent failures which must have preceded his ultimate success. Had
Kepler done the same, by recording only the final steps of his
inquiries, his method of investigation would have obtained the highest
celebrity, and would have been held up to future ages as a pattern for
their imitation. But such was the candour of his mind, and such his
inordinate love of truth, that he not only recorded his wildest fancies,
but emblazoned even his greatest errors. If Newton had indulged us with
the same insight into his physical inquiries, we should have witnessed
the same processes which were employed by Kepler, modified only by the
different characters and intensities of their imaginative powers.

When Kepler directed his mind to the discovery of a general principle,
he set distinctly before him, and never once lost sight of, the explicit
object of his search. His imagination, now unreined, indulged itself in
the creation and invention of various hypotheses. The most plausible, or
perhaps the most fascinating, of these was then submitted to a rigorous
scrutiny; and the moment it was found to be incompatible with the
results of observation and experiment, it was willingly abandoned, and
another hypothesis submitted to the same severe ordeal. By thus
gradually excluding erroneous views and assumptions, Kepler not only
made a decided approximation to the object of his pursuit, but in the
trials to which his opinions were submitted, and in the observations or
experiments which they called forth, he discovered new facts and arrived
at new views which directed his subsequent inquiries. By pursuing this
method, he succeeded in his most difficult researches, and discovered
those beautiful and profound laws which have been the admiration of
succeeding ages. In tracing the route which he followed, it is easy for
those who live under the light of modern science to say that his
fancies were often wild, and his labour often wasted; but, in judging of
Kepler's methods, we ought to place ourselves in his times, and invest
ourselves with the opinions and the knowledge of his contemporaries.

In the infancy of a science there is no speculation so absurd as not to
merit examination. The most remote and fanciful explanations of facts
have often been found the true ones; and opinions which have in one
century been objects of ridicule, have in the next been admitted among
the elements of our knowledge. The physical world teems with wonders,
and the various forms of matter exhibit to us properties and relations
far more extraordinary than the wildest fancy could have conceived.
Human reason stands appalled before this magnificent display of creative
power, and they who have drunk deepest of its wisdom will be the least
disposed to limit the excursions of physical speculation.

The influence of the imagination as an instrument of research, has, we
think, been much overlooked by those who have ventured to give laws to
philosophy. This faculty is of the greatest value in physical inquiries.
If we use it as a guide, and confide in its indications, it will
infallibly deceive us; but if we employ it as an auxiliary, it will
afford us the most invaluable aid. Its operation is like that of the
light troops which are sent out to ascertain the strength and position
of an enemy. When the struggle commences, their services terminate; and
it is by the solid phalanx of the judgment that the battle must be
fought and won.


G. S. TULLIS, PRINTER, CUPAN.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |               Transcriber's Notes and Errata                 |
  |                                                              |
  | The following typographical errors have been corrected:      |
  |                                                              |
  |               |Error         |Correction    |                |
  |               |              |              |                |
  |               |betwen        |between       |                |
  |               |his his       |his           |                |
  |               |secretry      |secretary     |                |
  |               |there sidence |the residence |                |
  |               |guaging       |gauging       |                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Martyrs of Science, or, The lives
of Galileo, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler, by David Brewster

