It was not, of course, possible for Calhoun to leave immediately. He had
to preside at various meetings of the medical officers of the fleet with
the health officials of Dara. He had to make explanations, and correct
misapprehensions, and delicately suggest such biological experiments as
would prove to the doctors of Weald that there was no longer a plague on
Dara, whatever had been the case three generations before. He had to sit
by while an extremely self-confident young Darian doctor named Korvan
rather condescendingly demonstrated that the former blue pigmentation
was a viral product quite unconnected with the plague, and that it had
been wiped out by a very trivial epidemic of--such and such. Calhoun
regarded that young man with a detached interest. Maril thought him
wonderful, even if she had to give him the material for his work.
Calhoun shrugged and went on with his work.

The return of loot. Mutual, full, and complete agreement that Darians
were no longer carriers of plague, if they had ever been. Unless Weald
convinced other worlds of this, Weald itself would join Dara in
isolation from neighboring worlds. A messenger ship to recall the
twenty-seven ships once floating in orbit about Weald. Most of them
would be used for some time, now, to bring beef from Orede. Some would
haul more grain from Weald. It would be paid for. There would be a need
for commercial missions to be exchanged between Weald and Dara.

It was a full week before he could go to the little Med Ship and prepare
for departure. Even then there were matters to be attended to. All the
food-supplies that had been removed could not be replaced. There were
biological samples to be replaced and some to be destroyed.... The
air-tanks....

Maril came to the Med Ship again when he was almost ready to leave. She
did not seem comfortable.

"I wish you could like Korvan," she said regretfully.

"I don't dislike him," said Calhoun. "I think he will be a most
prominent citizen, in time. He has all the talents for it."

Maril smiled very faintly.

"But you don't admire him."

"I wouldn't say that," protested Calhoun. "After all, he is attractive
to you, which is something I couldn't manage."

"You didn't try," said Maril. "Just as I didn't try to be fascinating to
you. Why?"

Calhoun spread out his hands. But he looked at Maril with respect. Not
every woman could have faced the fact that a man did not feel impelled
to make passes at her. It is simply a fact that has nothing to do with
desirability or charm or anything else.

"You're going to marry him," he said. "I hope you'll be very happy."

"He's the man I want," said Maril frankly. "He looks forward to splendid
discoveries. I'm sorry it's so important to him."

Calhoun did not ask the obvious question. Instead, he said thoughtfully;

"There's something you could do.... It needs to be done. The Med Service
in this sector has been badly handled. There are a number
of--discoveries that need to be made. I don't think your Korvan would
relish having things handed to him on a visible silver platter. But they
should be known...."

Maril said wrily;

"I can guess what you mean. I never went into detail about how the
blueskin markings disappeared, but a few hints--You've got books for
me?"

Calhoun nodded. He brought them to her.

"If we only fell in love with each other, Maril, we'd be a team! Too
bad! These are a wedding present you'll do well to hide."

She put her hands in his.

"I like you--almost as much as I like Murgatroyd! Yes! Korvan will never
know, and he'll be a great man." Then she added defensively, "And not
just from these books! He'll make his own wonderful discoveries."

"Of which," said Calhoun, "the most remarkable is you. Good luck
Maril!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently the Med Ship lifted. Calhoun aimed it for the next planet on
the list of those he was to visit. After this one more he'd return to
sector headquarters with a biting report to make on the way things had
been handled before him. He said;

"Overdrive coming, Murgatroyd!"

Then the stars went out and there was silence, and privacy, and a faint,
faint, almost unhearable series of background sounds which kept the Med
Ship from being totally unendurable.

Long, long days later the ship broke out of overdrive and Calhoun guided
it to a round and sunlit world. In due time he thumped the
communicator-button.

"Calling ground," he said crisply. "Calling ground! Med Ship Aesclipus
Twenty reporting arrival and asking coordinates for landing. Purpose of
landing, planetary health inspection. Our mass is fifty standard tons."

There was a pause while the beamed message went many, many thousands of
miles. Then the speaker said;

"_Aesclipus Twenty, repeat your identification!_"

Murgatroyd said;

"_Chee-chee? Chee?_"

Calhoun sighed.

"That's right, Murgatroyd! Here we go again!"


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pariah Planet, by Murray Leinster

