intermittent beam, such vibrations are not the cause of the sonorous
effects observed. According to him the aerial disturbances that produce
the sound arise spontaneously in the air itself by sudden expansion due
to heat communicated from the diaphragm--every increase of heat giving
rise to a fresh pulse of air. Mr. Preece was led to discard the
theoretical explanation of Lord Raleigh on account of the failure of
experiments undertaken to test the theory.

[Footnote 1: Amer. Asso. for Advancement of Science, August 27, 1880.]

[Footnote 2: _Nature_, vol. xxiii., p. 274.]

[Footnote 3: Roy. Soc., Mar. 10, 1881.]

[Illustration: Fig. 1. A B, Carbon Supports. C, Diaphragm.]

He was thus forced, by the supposed insufficiency of the explanation, to
seek in some other direction the cause of the phenomenon observed, and
as a consequence he adopted the ingenious hypothesis alluded to above.
But the experiments which had proved unsuccessful in the hands of Mr.
Preece were perfectly successful when repeated in America under better
conditions of experiment, and the supposed necessity for another
hypothesis at once vanished. I have shown in a recent paper read before
the National Academy of Science,[1] that audible sounds result from the
expansion and contraction of the material exposed to the beam, and that
a real to-and-fro vibration of the diaphragm occurs capable of producing
sonorous effects. It has occurred to me that Mr. Preece's failure to
detect, with a delicate microphone, the sonorous vibrations that were
so easily observed in our experiments, might be explained upon the
supposition that he had employed the ordinary form of Hughes's
microphone shown in Fig. 1, and that the vibrating area was confined
to the central portion of the disk. Under such circumstances it might
easily happen that both the supports (a b) of the microphone might touch
portions of the diaphragm which were practically at rest. It would of
course be interesting to ascertain whether any such localization of the
vibration as that supposed really occurred, and I have great pleasure in
showing to you tonight the apparatus by means of which this point has
been investigated (see Fig. 2).

[Footnote 1: April 21, 1881.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2. A, Stiff wire. B, Diaphragm. C, Hearing tube. D,
Perforated handle.]

The instrument is a modification of the form of microphone devised in
1872 by the late Sir Charles Wheatstone, and it consists essentially of
a stiff wire, A, one end of which is rigidly attached to the center of
a metallic diaphragm, B. In Wheatstone's original arrangement the
diaphragm was placed directly against the ear, and the free extremity
of the wire was rested against some sounding body--like a watch. In the
present arrangement the diaphragm is clamped at the circumference like
a telephone diaphragm, and the sounds are conveyed to the ear through a
rubber hearing tube, c. The wire passes through the perforated handle,
D, and is exposed only at the extremity. When the point, A, was rested
against the center of a diaphragm upon which was focused an intermittent
beam of sunlight, a clear musical tone was perceived by applying the ear
to the hearing tube, c. The surface of the diaphragm was then explored
with the point of the microphone, and sounds were obtained in all parts
of the illuminated area and in the corresponding area on the other side
of the diaphragm. Outside of this area on both sides of the diaphragm
the sounds became weaker and weaker, until, at a certain distance from
the center, they could no longer be perceived.

At the point where we would naturally place the supports of a Hughes
microphone (see Fig. 1) no sound was observed. We were also unable to
detect any audible effects when thepoint of the microphone was rested
against the support to which the diaphragm was attached. The negative
results obtained in Europe by Mr. Preece may, therefore, be reconciled
with the positive results obtained in America by Mr. Tainter and myself.
A still more curious demonstration of localization of vibration occurred
in the case of a large metallic mass. An intermittent beam of sunlight
was focused upon a brass weight (1 kilogramme), and the surface of the
weight was then explored with the microphone shown in Fig. 2. A feeble
but distinct sound was heard upon touching the surface within the
illuminated area and for a short distance outside, but not in other
parts.

In this experiment, as in the case of the thin diaphragm, absolute
contact between the point of the microphone and the surface explored was
necessary in order to obtain audible effects. Now I do not mean to
deny that sound waves may be originated in the manner suggested by Mr.
Preece, but I think that our experiments have demonstrated that the kind
of action described by Lord Raleigh actually occurs, and that it is
sufficient to account for the audible effects observed.

       *       *       *       *       *

A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this
office.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.


Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS.


In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 35 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN
& Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats.
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured, with hints for procuring
advances on inventions. Address

MUNN & CO., 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D. C.










End of Project Gutenberg's Scientific American Supplement, No. 288, by Various

