To accompany these specimens of the woods of America, Mr. Morris K.
Jesup, who has paid all the expense incurred in the collection of
specimens, is having prepared as an accompanying portion of the
exhibition water color drawings representing the actual size, color,
and appearance of the fruit, foliage, and flowers of the various trees.
Their commercial products, as far as they can be obtained, will also be
exhibited, as, for instance, in the case of the long-leaved pine, the
tar, resin, and pitch, for which it is especially valued. Then, too, in
an herbarium the fruits, leaves, and flowers are preserved as nearly as
possible in their natural state. When the collection is ready for public
view next spring it will be not only the largest, but the only complete
one of its kind in the country. There is nothing like it in the world,
as far as is known; certainly not in the royal museums of England,
France, or Germany.

Aside from the value of the collection, in a scientific way, it is
proposed to make it an adjunct to our educational system, which requires
that teachers shall instruct pupils as to the materials used for food
and clothing. The completeness of the exhibition will be of great
assistance also to landscape gardeners, as it will enable them to lay
out private and public parks so that the most striking effects of
foliage may be secured. The beauty of these effects can best be seen in
this country in our own Central Park, where there are more different
varieties and more combinations for foliage effects than in any other
area in the United States. To ascertain how these effects are obtained
one now has to go to much trouble to learn the names of the trees. With
this exhibition such information can be had merely by observation, for
the botanical and common names of each specimen will be attached to
it. It will also be of practical use in teaching the forester how to
cultivate trees as he would other crops. The rapid disappearance of
many valuable forest trees, with the increase in demand and decrease in
supply, will tend to make the collection valuable as a curiosity in
the not far distant future as representing the extinct trees of the
country.--_N.Y. Times_.

       *       *       *       *       *

A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this
office.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.


Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS.


In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 35 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN
& Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats.
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured, with hints for procuring
advances on inventions. Address

MUNN & CO., 261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D. C.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement No.
360, November 25, 1882, by Various

