practically demonstrated and systematically executed, experiments fail
to corroborate the theory, and if, furthermore, we find there is no
necessity for the theory, we naturally conclude that it is all wrong,
or, at least, imperfectly understood. Now there is one other quality
imparted to iron by successive shocks, which, I think, is independent
of crystallization, and this quality is hardness and consequent
brittleness. One noticeable feature about this also is, that as
"absolute cohesion" or tensile strength diminishes, "relative cohesion"
or strength to resist crushing increases. Specimens Nos. 2, 3, and 4 are
pieces of Swedish iron, probably from the celebrated mines of Dannemora.
Nos. 2 and 3 are parts of the same bolt, which, after some months' use
on a "heading machine" in a bolt and nut works, where it was subjected
to numerous and violent shocks, (perhaps 50,000 or 60,000 per day),
it broke short off, as you see in No 2, showing a highly crystalline
fracture. To test whether this structure continued through the bolt, I
had it nicked by a blacksmith's cold chisel and broken. The specimen
shows that it is still stronger at that point than at the point where
it is actually broken, but the resulting fracture shows the same
crystalline appearance. I next had specimen No. 4 cut from a fresh
bar of iron which had never been used for anything. It also shows a
crystalline fracture, indicating that this peculiarity had existed in
the iron of both from the beginning.

I next took specimen No. 3 and subjected it to a careful annealing,
taking perhaps two hours in the operation. Although it is a 1-1/8 bolt
and has V threads cut upon it we were unable to break it, although bent
cold through an arc of 90 deg., and probably would have doubled upon itself
if we had had the means to have forced it. Now what does this show? Have
the crystals been obliterated by the process of annealing, or has only
their cleavage been destroyed, so that when they break, instead of
showing brilliant, sparkling faces, they are drawn into a fibrous
looking mass? The latter seems to be the most plausible theory, to which
I admit objections may be raised. For my own part, I am inclined to the
belief that the crystal exists in all iron which is finished above a
bright red heat, and that between that and black heat they are formed
and have whatever characteristics circumstances may confer upon them,
modified by the action of agencies heretofore mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this
office.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.


Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS.


In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 35 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN
& Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats.
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured, with hints for procuring
advances on inventions. Address

MUNN & CO., 261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D. C.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
344, August 5, 1882, by Various

