
Charles clasped her hand with a look that was enough.  Then with a
strange smile, half sweetness, half the contortion of a mortal pang,
the dying man said, "May she kiss me once?"

And when her lips had touched the cold damp brow--

"There--My fourth seven.  At last!  The change is come.  Old--
impish--evil--self left behind.  At last!  Thanks to Him who treads
down Satan under our feet.  Thanks!  Take her away now."

Charles took her away, scarce knowing where they went,--out into the
spring sunshine, on the slopes above the turf bowling-green, where
the captive King had beguiled his weary hours.  Only then would awe
and emotion let them speak, though his arm was round her, her hand
in his, and his first words were, as he looked at the scarf that
still bore up her arm, "And this is what you have borne for me?"

"It is all but healed.  Don't think of it."

"I shall all my life!  Poor fellow, he might well bid me deserve
you.  I never can.  'Tis to you I owe all.  I believe, indeed, the
ambassador might have claimed me, but he is so tardy that probably I
should have been hanged long before the proper form was ready; and
it would have been to exile, and with a tainted name.  You have won
for me the clearing of name and honour--home, parents and child and
all, besides your sweet self."

"And it was not me, but he whom we so despised and dreaded.  Had I
not been seized, I could only have implored for you."

"I know this, that if you had not been what you are, my boy would
have borne a dishonoured name, and we should never have been
together as now."

It was in truth their first meeting in freedom and security as
lovers; but it could only be in a grave, quiet fashion, under the
knowledge that he, to whom their re-union was chiefly owing, was
breathing out the life he had sacrificed for them.  Thus they only
gently and in a low voice went over their past doings and feelings
as they walked up and down together, till Dr. Woodford came in the
sunset to tell them that the change so longed for had come in peace,
and with a smile that told of release from the Evil Angel.

* * * * *

Peregrine's wish was fulfilled, and he was buried in Portchester
Churchyard at Mrs. Woodford's feet.  This time it was Mr.
Horncastle, old as he was, who preached the funeral sermon, the In
Memoriam of our forefathers; and by special desire of Major Oakshott
took for his text, 'At evening time there shall be light.'  He
spoke, sometimes in a voice broken, as much by feeling as by age, of
the childhood blighted by a cruel superstition, and perverted, as he
freely made confession, by discipline without comprehension, because
no confidence had been sought.  Then ensued a tribute of earnest,
generous justice to her who had done her best to undo the warp in
the boy's nature, and whose blessed influence the young man had
owned to the last, through all the temptations, errors, and frenzies
of his life.  Nor did the good man fail to make this a means of
testifying to the entire neighbourhood, who had flocked to hear him,
all that might be desirable to be known respecting the conflict at
Portchester, actually reading Peregrine's affidavit, as indeed was
due to Colonel Archfield, so as to prove that this was no mere
pardon, though technically it had so to stand, but actual acquittal.
Nor was the struggle with evil at the end forgotten, nor the
surrender alike of love and of hatred, as well as of his own life,
which had been the final conquest, the decisive passing from
darkness to light.

It was a strange sermon according to present ideas, but not to those
who had grown up to the semi-political preaching of the century then
in its last decade; and it filled many eyes with tears, many hearts
with a deeper spirit of that charity which hopeth all things.

* * * * *

A month later Charles Archfield and Anne Jacobina Woodford were
married at the little parish church of Fareham.  Sir Philip insisted
on making it a gay and brilliant wedding, in order to demonstrate to
the neighbourhood that though the maiden had been his grandson's
governess, she was a welcomed and honoured acquisition to the
family.  Perhaps too he perceived the error of his middle age, when
he contrasted that former wedding, the work of worldly
conventionality, with the present.  In the first, an unformed,
undeveloped lad, unable to understand his own true feelings and
affections had been passively linked to a shallow, frivolous, ill-
trained creature, utterly incapable of growing into a helpmeet for
him; whereas the love and trust of the stately-looking pair, in the
fresh bloom of manhood and womanhood, had been proved in the furnace
of trial, so that the troth they plighted had deep foundation for
the past, and bright hope for the future.

Nor was anybody more joyous than little Philip, winning his Nana for
a better mother to him than his own could ever have been

It was in a blue velvet coat that Colonel Archfield was married.  He
had resigned his Austrian commission; and though the 'Salamander,'
was empowered to offer him an excellent staff appointment in the
English army, he decided to refuse.  Sir Philip showed signs of
having been aged and shaken by the troubles of the winter, and
required his son's assistance in the care of his property, and
little Philip was growing up to need a father's hand, so that
Charles came to the conclusion that there was no need to cross the
old Cavalier's dislike to the new regime, nor to make his mother and
wife again suffer the anxieties of knowing him on active service,
while his duties lay at home.

Sedley Archfield, after a long illness, owed recovery both in body
and mind to Mrs. Oakshott, and by her arrangement finally obtained a
fresh commission in a regiment raised for the defence of the
possessions of the East India Company.  And that the poor changeling
was still tenderly remembered might be proved by the fact that when
the bells rung for Queen Anne's coronation there was one baby
Peregrine at Fareham and another at Oakwood.




