Madame de Longueville."

The queen smiled.

"Monsieur de Longueville is of royal blood, madame," said D'Artagnan.

"Yes," said the queen; "but his son?"

"His son, madame, must be, since the husband of the son's mother is."

"And your friend has nothing more to ask for Madame de Longueville?"

"No, madame, for I presume that the king, standing godfather to him,
could do no less than present him with five hundred thousand francs,
giving his father, also, the government of Normandy."

"As to the government of Normandy," replied the queen, "I think I can
promise; but with regard to the present, the cardinal is always telling
me there is no more money in the royal coffers."

"We shall search for some, madame, and I think we can find a little, and
if your majesty approves, we will seek for some together."

"What next?"

"What next, madame?"

"Yes."

"That is all."

"Haven't you, then, a fourth companion?"

"Yes, madame, the Comte de la Fere."

"What does he ask?"

"Nothing."

"There is in the world, then, one man who, having the power to ask,
asks--nothing!"

"There is the Comte de la Fere, madame. The Comte de la Fere is not a
man."

"What is he, then?"

"The Comte de la Fere is a demi-god."

"Has he not a son, a young man, a relative, a nephew, of whom Comminges
spoke to me as being a brave boy, and who, with Monsieur de Chatillon,
brought the standards from Lens?"

"He has, as your majesty has said, a ward, who is called the Vicomte de
Bragelonne."

"If that young man should be appointed to a regiment what would his
guardian say?"

"Perhaps he would accept."

"Perhaps?"

"Yes, if your majesty herself should beg him to accept."

"He must be indeed a strange man. Well, we will reflect and perhaps we
will beg him. Are you satisfied, sir?"

"There is one thing the queen has not signed--her assent to the treaty."

"Of what use to-day? I will sign it to-morrow."

"I can assure her majesty that if she does not sign to-day she will not
have time to sign to-morrow. Consent, then, I beg you, madame, to write
at the bottom of this schedule, which has been drawn up by Mazarin, as
you see:

"'I consent to ratify the treaty proposed by the Parisians.'"

Anne was caught, she could not draw back--she signed; but scarcely had
she done so when pride burst forth and she began to weep.

D'Artagnan started on seeing these tears. Since that period of history
queens have shed tears, like other women.

The Gascon shook his head, these tears from royalty melted his heart.

"Madame," he said, kneeling, "look upon the unhappy man at your feet. He
begs you to believe that at a gesture of your majesty everything will be
possible to him. He has faith in himself; he has faith in his friends;
he wishes also to have faith in his queen. And in proof that he fears
nothing, that he counts on nothing, he will restore Monsieur de Mazarin
to your majesty without conditions. Behold, madame! here are the august
signatures of your majesty's hand; if you think you are right in giving
them to me, you shall do so, but from this very moment you are free from
any obligation to keep them."

And D'Artagnan, full of splendid pride and manly intrepidity, placed in
Anne's hands, in a bundle, the papers that he had one by one won from
her with so much difficulty.

There are moments--for if everything is not good, everything in this
world is not bad--in which the most rigid and the coldest soul is
softened by the tears of strong emotion, heart-arraigning sentiment: one
of these momentary impulses actuated Anne. D'Artagnan, when he gave way
to his own feelings--which were in accordance with those of the
queen--had accomplished more than the most astute diplomacy could have
attempted. He was therefore instantly recompensed, either for his
address or for his sensibility, whichever it might be termed.

"You were right, sir," said Anne. "I misunderstood you. There are the
acts signed; I deliver them to you without compulsion. Go and bring me
back the cardinal as soon as possible."

"Madame," faltered D'Artagnan, "'tis twenty years ago--I have a good
memory--since I had the honor behind a piece of tapestry in the Hotel de
Ville, of kissing one of those lovely hands."

"There is the other," replied the queen; "and that the left hand should
not be less liberal than the right," she drew from her finger a diamond
similar to the one formerly given to him, "take and keep this ring in
remembrance of me.

"Madame," said D'Artagnan, rising, "I have only one thing more to wish,
which is, that the next thing you ask from me, shall be--my life."

And with this conclusion--a way peculiar to himself--he rose and left
the room.

"I never rightly understood those men," said the queen, as she watched
him retiring from her presence; "and it is now too late, for in a year
the king will be of age."

In twenty-four hours D'Artagnan and Porthos conducted Mazarin to the
queen; and the one received his commission, the other his patent of
nobility.

On the same day the Treaty of Paris was signed, and it was everywhere
announced that the cardinal had shut himself up for three days in order
to draw it up with the greatest care.

Here is what each of the parties concerned gained by that treaty:

Monsieur de Conti received Damvilliers, and having made his proofs as
general, he succeeded in remaining a soldier, instead of being made
cardinal. Moreover, something had been said of a marriage with Mazarin's
niece. The idea was welcomed by the prince, to whom it was of little
importance whom he married, so long as he married some one.

The Duc de Beaufort made his entrance at court, receiving ample
reparation for the wrongs he had suffered, and all the honor due to his
rank. Full pardon was accorded to those who had aided in his escape. He
received also the office of admiral, which had been held by his father,
the Duc de Vendome and an indemnity for his houses and castles,
demolished by the Parliament of Bretagne.

The Duc de Bouillon received domains of a value equal to that of his
principality of Sedan, and the title of prince, granted to him and to
those belonging to his house.

The Duc de Longueville gained the government of Pont-de-l'Arche, five
hundred thousand francs for his wife and the honor of seeing her son
held at the baptismal font by the young king and Henrietta of England.

Aramis stipulated that Bazin should officiate at that ceremony and that
Planchet should furnish the christening sugar plums.

The Duc d'Elbeuf obtained payment of certain sums due to his wife, one
hundred thousand francs for his eldest son and twenty-five thousand for
each of the three others.

The coadjutor alone obtained nothing. They promised, indeed, to
negotiate with the pope for a cardinal's hat for him; but he knew how
little reliance should be placed on such promises, made by the queen and
Mazarin. Quite contrary to the lot of Monsieur de Conti, unable to be
cardinal, he was obliged to remain a soldier.

And therefore, when all Paris was rejoicing in the expected return of
the king, appointed for the next day, Gondy alone, in the midst of the
general happiness, was dissatisfied; he sent for the two men whom he was
wont to summon when in especially bad humor. Those two men were the
Count de Rochefort and the mendicant of Saint Eustache. They came with
their usual promptness, and the coadjutor spent with them a part of the
night.




89. Difficult for Kings to return to the Capitals of their Kingdoms.


Whilst D'Artagnan and Porthos were engaged in conducting the cardinal to
Saint Germain, Athos and Aramis returned to Paris.

Each had his own particular visit to make.

Aramis rushed to the Hotel de Ville, where Madame de Longueville was
sojourning. The duchess loudly lamented the announcement of peace. War
had made her a queen; peace brought her abdication. She declared that
she would never assent to the treaty and that she wished eternal war.

But when Aramis had presented that peace to her in a true light--that is
to say, with all its advantages; when he had pointed out to her, in
exchange for the precarious and contested royalty of Paris, the
viceroyalty of Font-de-l'Arche, in other words, of all Normandy; when he
had rung in her ears the five hundred thousand francs promised by the
cardinal; when he had dazzled her eyes with the honor bestowed on her by
the king in holding her child at the baptismal font, Madame de
Longueville contended no longer, except as is the custom with pretty
women to contend, and defended herself only to surrender at last.

Aramis made a presence of believing in the reality of her opposition and
was unwilling to deprive himself in his own view of the credit of her
conversion.

"Madame," he said, "you have wished to conquer the prince your
brother--that is to say, the greatest captain of the age; and when women
of genius wish anything they always succeed in attaining it. You have
succeeded; the prince is beaten, since he can no longer fight. Now
attach him to our party. Withdraw him gently from the queen, whom he
does not like, from Mazarin, whom he despises. The Fronde is a comedy,
of which the first act only is played. Let us wait for a denouement--for
the day when the prince, thanks to you, shall have turned against the
court."

Madame de Longueville was persuaded. This Frondist duchess trusted so
confidently to the power of her fine eyes, that she could not doubt
their influence even over Monsieur de Conde; and the chronicles of the
time aver that her confidence was justified.

Athos, on quitting Aramis, went to Madame de Chevreuse. Here was another
frondeuse to persuade, and she was even less open to conviction than her
younger rival. There had been no stipulation in her favor. Monsieur de
Chevreuse had not been appointed governor of a province, and if the
queen should consent to be godmother it could be only of her grandson or
granddaughter. At the first announcement of peace Madame de Chevreuse
frowned, and in spite of all the logic of Athos to show her that a
prolonged war would have been impracticable, contended in favor of
hostilities.

"My fair friend," said Athos, "allow me to tell you that everybody is
tired of war. You will get yourself exiled, as you did in the time of
Louis XIII. Believe me, we have passed the time of success in intrigue,
and your fine eyes are not destined to be eclipsed by regretting Paris,
where there will always be two queens as long as you are there."

"Oh," cried the duchess, "I cannot make war alone, but I can avenge
myself on that ungrateful queen and most ambitious favorite-on the honor
of a duchess, I will avenge myself."

"Madame," replied Athos, "do not injure the Vicomte de Bragelonne--do
not ruin his prospects. Alas! excuse my weakness! There are moments when
a man grows young again in his children."

The duchess smiled, half tenderly, half ironically.

"Count," she said, "you are, I fear, gained over to the court. I suppose
you have a blue ribbon in your pocket?"

"Yes, madame; I have that of the Garter, which King Charles I. gave me
some days before he died."

"Come, I am growing an old woman!" said the duchess, pensively.

Athos took her hand and kissed it. She sighed, as she looked at him.

"Count," she said, "Bragelonne must be a charming place. You are a man
of taste. You have water--woods--flowers there?"

She sighed again and leaned her charming head, gracefully reclined, on
her hand, still beautiful in form and color.

"Madame!" exclaimed Athos, "what were you saying just now about growing
old? Never have I seen you look so young, so beautiful!"

The duchess shook her head.

"Does Monsieur de Bragelonne remain in Paris?" she inquired.

"What think you of it?" inquired Athos.

"Leave him with me," replied the duchess.

"No, madame; if you have forgotten the history of Oedipus, I, at least,
remember it."

"Really, sir, you are delightful, and I should like to spend a month at
Bragelonne."

"Are you not afraid of making people envious of me, duchess?" replied
Athos.

"No, I shall go incognito, count, under the name of Marie Michon."

"You are adorable, madame."

"But do not keep Raoul with you."

"Why not?"

"Because he is in love."

"He! he is quite a child!"

"And 'tis a child he loves."

Athos became thoughtful.

"You are right, duchess. This singular passion for a child of seven may
some day make him very unhappy. There is to be war in Flanders. He shall
go thither."

"And at his return you will send him to me. I will arm him against
love."

"Alas, madame!" exclaimed Athos, "to-day love is like war--the
breastplate is becoming useless."

Raoul entered at this moment; he came to announce that the solemn
entrance of the king, queen, and her ministers was to take place on the
ensuing day.

The next day, in fact, at daybreak, the court made preparations to quit
Saint Germain.

Meanwhile, the queen every hour had been sending for D'Artagnan.

"I hear," she said, "that Paris is not quiet. I am afraid for the king's
safety; place yourself close to the coach door on the right."

"Reassure yourself, madame, I will answer for the king's safety."

As he left the queen's presence Bernouin summoned him to the cardinal.

"Sir," said Mazarin to him "an emeute is spoken of in Paris. I shall be
on the king's left and as I am the chief person threatened, remain at
the coach door to the left."

"Your eminence may be perfectly easy," replied D'Artagnan; "they will
not touch a hair of your head."

"Deuce take it!" he thought to himself, "how can I take care of both?
Ah! plague on't, I will guard the king and Porthos shall guard the
cardinal."

This arrangement pleased every one. The queen had confidence in the
courage of D'Artagnan, which she knew, and the cardinal in the strength
of Porthos, which he had experienced.

The royal procession set out for Paris. Guitant and Comminges, at the
head of the guards, marched first; then came the royal carriage, with
D'Artagnan on one side, Porthos on the other; then the musketeers, for
two and twenty years staunch friends of D'Artagnan. During twenty he had
been lieutenant, their captain since the night before.

The cortege proceeded to Notre Dame, where a Te Deum was chanted. All
Paris were in the streets. The Swiss were drawn up along the road, but
as the road was long, they were placed at six or eight feet distant from
each other and one deep only. This force was therefore wholly
insufficient, and from time to time the line was broken through by the
people and was formed again with difficulty. Whenever this occurred,
although it proceeded only from goodwill and a desire to see the king
and queen, Anne looked at D'Artagnan anxiously.

Mazarin, who had dispensed a thousand louis to make the people cry "Long
live Mazarin," and who had accordingly no confidence in acclamations
bought at twenty pistoles each, kept one eye on Porthos; but that
gigantic body-guard replied to the look with his great bass voice, "Be
tranquil, my lord," and Mazarin became more and more composed.

At the Palais Royal, the crowd, which had flowed in from the adjacent
street was still greater; like an impetuous mob, a wave of human beings
came to meet the carriage and rolled tumultuously into the Rue Saint
Honore.

When the procession reached the palace, loud cries of "Long live their
majesties!" resounded. Mazarin leaned out of the window. One or two
shouts of "Long live the cardinal" saluted his shadow; but instantly
hisses and yells stifled them remorselessly. Mazarin turned pale and
shrank back in the coach.

"Low-born fellows!" ejaculated Porthos.

D'Artagnan said nothing, but twirled his mustache with a peculiar
gesture which showed that his fine Gascon humor was awake.

Anne of Austria bent down and whispered in the young king's ear:

"Say something gracious to Monsieur d'Artagnan, my son."

The young king leaned toward the door.

"I have not said good-morning to you, Monsieur d'Artagnan," he said;
"nevertheless, I have remarked you. It was you who were behind my
bed-curtains that night the Parisians wished to see me asleep."

"And if the king permits me," returned the Gascon, "I shall be near him
always when there is danger to be encountered."

"Sir," said Mazarin to Porthos, "what would you do if the crowd fell
upon us?"

"Kill as many as I could, my lord."

"Hem! brave as you are and strong as you are, you could not kill them
all."

"'Tis true," answered Porthos, rising on his saddle, in order that he
might appraise the immense crowd, "there are a lot of them."

"I think I should like the other fellow better than this one," said
Mazarin to himself, and he threw himself back in his carriage.

The queen and her minister, more especially the latter, had reason to
feel anxious. The crowd, whilst preserving an appearance of respect and
even of affection for the king and queen regent, began to be tumultuous.
Reports were whispered about, like certain sounds which announce, as
they whistle from wave to wave, the coming storm--and when they pass
athwart a multitude, presage an emeute.

D'Artagnan turned toward the musketeers and made a sign imperceptible to
the crowd, but very easily understood by that chosen regiment, the
flower of the army.

The ranks closed firmly in and a kind of majestic tremor ran from man to
man.

At the Barriere des Sergents the procession was obliged to stop.
Comminges left the head of the escort and went to the queen's carriage.
Anne questioned D'Artagnan by a look. He answered in the same language.

"Proceed," she said.

Comminges returned to his post. An effort was made and the living
barrier was violently broken through.

Some complaints arose from the crowd and were addressed this time to the
king as well as the minister.

"Onward!" cried D'Artagnan, in a loud voice.

"Onward!" cried Porthos.

But as if the multitude had waited only for this demonstration to burst
out, all the sentiments of hostility that possessed it exploded
simultaneously. Cries of "Down with Mazarin!" "Death to the cardinal!"
resounded on all sides.

At the same time through the streets of Grenelle, Saint Honore, and Du
Coq, a double stream of people broke the feeble hedge of Swiss guards
and came like a whirlwind even to the very legs of Porthos's horse and
that of D'Artagnan.

This new eruption was more dangerous than the others, being composed of
armed men. It was plain that it was not the chance combination of those
who had collected a number of the malcontents at the same spot, but a
concerted organized attack.

Each of these mobs was led by a chief, one of whom appeared to belong,
not to the people, but to the honorable corporation of mendicants, and
the other, notwithstanding his affected imitation of the people, might
easily be discerned to be a gentleman. Both were evidently stimulated by
the same impulse.

There was a shock which was perceived even in the royal carriage.
Myriads of hoarse cries, forming one vast uproar, were heard, mingled
with guns firing.

"Ho! Musketeers!" cried D'Artagnan.

The escort divided into two files. One of them passed around to the
right of the carriage, the other to the left. One went to support
D'Artagnan, the other Porthos. Then came a skirmish, the more terrible
because it had no definite object; the more melancholy, because those
engaged in it knew not for whom they were fighting. Like all popular
movements, the shock given by the rush of this mob was formidable. The
musketeers, few in number, not being able, in the midst of this crowd,
to make their horses wheel around, began to give way. D'Artagnan offered
to lower the blinds of the royal carriage, but the young king stretched
out his arm, saying:

"No, sir! I wish to see everything."

"If your majesty wishes to look out--well, then, look!" replied
D'Artagnan. And turning with that fury which made him so formidable, he
rushed toward the chief of the insurgents, a man who, with a huge sword
in his hand, was trying to hew a passage to the coach door through the
musketeers.

"Make room!" cried D'Artagnan. "Zounds! give way!"

At these words the man with a pistol and sword raised his head, but it
was too late. The blow was sped by D'Artagnan; the rapier had pierced
his bosom.

"Ah! confound it!" cried the Gascon, trying in vain, too late, to
retract the thrust. "What the devil are you doing here, count?"

"Accomplishing my destiny," replied Rochefort, falling on one knee. "I
have already got up again after three stabs from you, I shall never rise
after this fourth."

"Count!" said D'Artagnan, with some degree of emotion, "I struck without
knowing that it was you. I am sorry, if you die, that you should die
with sentiments of hatred toward me."

Rochefort extended his hand to D'Artagnan, who took it. The count wished
to speak, but a gush of blood stifled him. He stiffened in the last
convulsions of death and expired.

"Back, people!" cried D'Artagnan, "your leader is dead; you have no
longer any business here."

Indeed, as if De Rochefort had been the very soul of the attack, the
crowd who had followed and obeyed him took to flight on seeing him fall.
D'Artagnan charged, with a party of musketeers, up the Rue du Coq, and
the portion of the mob he assailed disappeared like smoke, dispersing
near the Place Saint Germain-l'Auxerrois and taking the direction of the
quays.

D'Artagnan returned to help Porthos, if Porthos needed help; but
Porthos, for his part, had done his work as conscientiously as
D'Artagnan. The left of the carriage was as well cleared as the right,
and they drew up the blind of the window which Mazarin, less heroic than
the king, had taken the precaution to lower.

Porthos looked very melancholy.

"What a devil of a face you have, Porthos! and what a strange air for a
victor!"

"But you," answered Porthos, "seem to me agitated."

"There's a reason! Zounds! I have just killed an old friend."

"Indeed!" replied Porthos, "who?"

"That poor Count de Rochefort."

"Well! exactly like me! I have just killed a man whose face is not
unknown to me. Unluckily, I hit him on the head and immediately his face
was covered with blood."

"And he said nothing as he died?"

"Yes; he exclaimed, 'Oh!'"

"I suppose," answered D'Artagnan, laughing, "if he only said that, it
did not enlighten you much."

"Well, sir!" cried the queen.

"Madame, the passage is quite clear and your majesty can continue your
road."

In fact, the procession arrived, in safety at Notre Dame, at the front
gate of which all the clergy, with the coadjutor at their head, awaited
the king, the queen and the minister, for whose happy return they
chanted a Te Deum.

As the service was drawing to a close a boy entered the church in great
excitement, ran to the sacristy, dressed himself quickly in the choir
robes, and cleaving, thanks to that uniform, the crowd that filled the
temple, approached Bazin, who, clad in his blue robe, was standing
gravely in his place at the entrance to the choir.

Bazin felt some one pulling his sleeve. He lowered to earth his eyes,
beatifically raised to Heaven, and recognized Friquet.

"Well, you rascal, what is it? How do you dare to disturb me in the
exercise of my functions?" asked the beadle.

"Monsieur Bazin," said Friquet, "Monsieur Maillard--you know who he is,
he gives holy water at Saint Eustache----"

"Well, go on."

"Well, he received in the scrimmage a sword stroke on the head. That
great giant who was there gave it to him."

"In that case," said Bazin, "he must be pretty sick."

"So sick that he is dying, and he wants to confess to the coadjutor,
who, they say, has power to remit great sins."

"And does he imagine that the coadjutor will put himself out for him?"

"To be sure; the coadjutor has promised."

"Who told you that?"

"Monsieur Maillard himself."

"You have seen him, then?"

"Certainly; I was there when he fell."

"What were you doing there?"

"I was shouting, 'Down with Mazarin!' 'Death to the cardinal!' 'The
Italian to the gallows!' Isn't that what you would have me shout?"

"Be quiet, you rascal!" said Bazin, looking uneasily around.

"So that he told me, that poor Monsieur Maillard, 'Go find the
coadjutor, Friquet, and if you bring him to me you shall be my heir.'
Say, then, Father Bazin--the heir of Monsieur Maillard, the giver of
holy water at Saint Eustache! Hey! I shall have nothing to do but to
fold my arms! All the same, I should like to do him that service--what
do you say to it?"

"I will tell the coadjutor," said Bazin.

In fact, he slowly and respectfully approached the prelate and spoke to
him privately a few words, to which the latter responded by an
affirmative sign. He then returned with the same slow step and said:

"Go and tell the dying man that he must be patient. Monseigneur will be
with him in an hour."

"Good!" said Friquet, "my fortune is made."

"By the way," said Bazin, "where was he carried?"

"To the tower Saint Jacques la Boucherie;" and delighted with the
success of his embassy, Friquet started off at the top of his speed.

When the Te Deum was over, the coadjutor, without stopping to change his
priestly dress, took his way toward that old tower which he knew so
well. He arrived in time. Though sinking from moment to moment, the
wounded man was not yet dead. The door was opened to the coadjutor of
the room in which the mendicant was suffering.

A moment later Friquet went out, carrying in his hand a large leather
bag; he opened it as soon as he was outside the chamber and to his great
astonishment found it full of gold. The mendicant had kept his word and
made Friquet his heir.

"Ah! Mother Nanette!" cried Friquet, suffocating; "ah! Mother Nanette!"

He could say no more; but though he hadn't strength to speak he had
enough for action. He rushed headlong to the street, and like the Greek
from Marathon who fell in the square at Athens, with his laurel in his
hand, Friquet reached Councillor Broussel's threshold, and then fell
exhausted, scattering on the floor the louis disgorged by his leather
bag.

Mother Nanette began by picking up the louis; then she picked up
Friquet.

In the meantime the cortege returned to the Palais Royal.

"That Monsieur d'Artagnan is a very brave man, mother," said the young
king.

"Yes, my son; and he rendered very important services to your father.
Treat him kindly, therefore, in the future."

"Captain," said the young king to D'Artagnan, on descending from the
carriage, "the queen has charged me to invite you to dinner to-day--you
and your friend the Baron du Vallon."

That was a great honor for D'Artagnan and for Porthos. Porthos was
delighted; and yet during the entire repast he seemed to be preoccupied.

"What was the matter with you, baron?" D'Artagnan said to him as they
descended the staircase of the Palais Royal. "You seemed at dinner to be
anxious about something."

"I was trying," said Porthos, "to recall where I had seen that mendicant
whom I must have killed."

"And you couldn't remember?"

"No."

"Well, search, my friend, search; and when you have found, you will tell
me, will you not?"

"Pardieu!" said Porthos.




90. Conclusion.


On going home, the two friends found a letter from Athos, who desired
them to meet him at the Grand Charlemagne on the following day.

The friends went to bed early, but neither of them slept. When we arrive
at the summit of our wishes, success has usually the power to drive away
sleep on the first night after the fulfilment of long cherished hopes.

The next day at the appointed hour they went to see Athos and found him
and Aramis in traveling costume.

"What!" cried Porthos, "are we all going away, then? I also have made my
preparations this morning."

"Oh, heavens! yes," said Aramis. "There's nothing to do in Paris now
there's no Fronde. The Duchess de Longueville has invited me to pass a
few days in Normandy, and has deputed me, while her son is being
baptized, to go and prepare her residence at Rouen; after which, if
nothing new occurs, I shall go and bury myself in my convent at
Noisy-le-Sec."

"And I," said Athos, "am returning to Bragelonne. You know, dear
D'Artagnan, I am nothing more than a good honest country gentleman.
Raoul has no fortune other than I possess, poor child! and I must take
care of it for him, since I only lend him my name."

"And Raoul--what shall you do with him?"

"I leave him with you, my friend. War has broken out in Flanders. You
shall take him with you there. I am afraid that remaining at Blois would
be dangerous to his youthful mind. Take him and teach him to be as brave
and loyal as you are yourself."

"Then," replied D'Artagnan, "though I shall not have you, Athos, at all
events I shall have that dear fair-haired head by me; and though he's
but a boy, yet, since your soul lives again in him, dear Athos, I shall
always fancy that you are near me, sustaining and encouraging me."

The four friends embraced with tears in their eyes.

Then they departed, without knowing whether they would ever see each
other again.

D'Artagnan returned to the Rue Tiquetonne with Porthos, still possessed
by the wish to find out who the man was that he had killed. On arriving
at the Hotel de la Chevrette they found the baron's equipage all ready
and Mousqueton on his saddle.

"Come, D'Artagnan," said Porthos, "bid adieu to your sword and go with
me to Pierrefonds, to Bracieux, or to Du Vallon. We will grow old
together and talk of our companions."

"No!" replied D'Artagnan, "deuce take it, the campaign is going to
begin; I wish to be there, I expect to get something by it."

"What do you expect to get?"

"Why, I expect to be made Marechal of France!"

"Ha! ha!" cried Porthos, who was not completely taken in by D'Artagnan's
Gasconades.

"Come my brother, go with me," added D'Artagnan, "and I will see that
you are made a duke!"

"No," answered Porthos, "Mouston has no desire to fight; besides, they
have erected a triumphal arch for me to enter my barony, which will kill
my neighbors with envy."

"To that I can say nothing," returned D'Artagnan, who knew the vanity of
the new baron. "Then, here's to our next merry meeting!"

"Adieu, dear captain," said Porthos, "I shall always be happy to welcome
you to my barony."

"Yes, yes, when the campaign is over," replied the Gascon.

"His honor's equipage is waiting," said Mousqueton.

The two friends, after a cordial pressure of the hands, separated.
D'Artagnan was standing at the door looking after Porthos with a
mournful gaze, when the baron, after walking scarcely more than twenty
paces, returned--stood still--struck his forehead with his finger and
exclaimed:

"I recollect!"

"What?" inquired D'Artagnan.

"Who the beggar was that I killed."

"Ah! indeed! and who was he?"

"'Twas that low fellow, Bonacieux."

And Porthos, enchanted at having relieved his mind, rejoined Mousqueton
and they disappeared around an angle of the street. D'Artagnan stood for
an instant, mute, pensive and motionless; then, as he went in, he saw
the fair Madeleine, his hostess, standing on the threshold.

"Madeleine," said the Gascon, "give me your apartment on the first
floor; now that I am a captain in the royal musketeers I must make an
appearance; nevertheless, reserve my old room on the fifth story for me;
one never knows what may happen."

                                  ----

