difficulties that surrounded him, to the scantiness of his resources. We
see a man without rank, wealth, or friends, raising himself to the head
of a popular government in the metropolis of the Church--in the City
of the Empire. We see him reject any title save that of a popular
magistrate--establish at one stroke a free constitution--a new code of
law. We see him first expel, then subdue, the fiercest aristocracy in
Europe--conquer the most stubborn banditti, rule impartially the most
turbulent people, embruted by the violence, and sunk in the corruption
of centuries. We see him restore trade--establish order--create
civilization as by a miracle--receive from crowned heads homage and
congratulation--outwit, conciliate, or awe, the wiliest priesthood of
the Papal Diplomacy--and raise his native city at once to sudden yet
acknowledged eminence over every other state, its superior in arts,
wealth, and civilization;--we ask what errors we are to weigh in the
opposite balance, and we find an unnecessary ostentation, a fanatical
extravagance, and a certain insolent sternness. But what are such
offences--what the splendour of a banquet, or the ceremony of
Knighthood, or a few arrogant words, compared with the vices of
almost every prince who was his contemporary? This is the way to judge
character: we must compare men with men, and not with ideals of what
men should be. We look to the amazing benefits Rienzi conferred upon his
country. We ask his means, and see but his own abilities. His treasury
becomes impoverished--his enemies revolt--the Church takes advantage of
his weakness--he is excommunicated--the soldiers refuse to fight--the
People refuse to assist--the Barons ravage the country--the ways are
closed, the provisions are cut off from Rome. ("Allora le strade furo
chiuse, li massari de la terre non portavano grano, ogni die nasceva
nuovo rumore."--"Vita di Cola di Rienzi", lib. i. cap. 37.) A handful
of banditti enter the city--Rienzi proposes to resist them--the People
desert--he abdicates. Rapine, Famine, Massacre, ensue--they who deserted
regret, repent--yet he is still unassisted, alone--now an exile, now a
prisoner, his own genius saves him from every peril, and restores him
to greatness. He returns, the Pope's Legate refuses him arms--the People
refuse him money. He re-establishes law and order, expels the tyrants,
renounces his former faults (this, the second period of his power, has
been represented by Gibbon and others as that of his principal faults,
and he is evidently at this time no favourite with his contemporaneous
biographer; but looking to what he did, we find amazing dexterity,
prudence, and energy in the most difficult crisis, and none of his
earlier faults. It is true, that he does not shew the same brilliant
extravagance which, I suspect, dazzled his contemporaries, more than his
sounder qualities; but we find that in a few weeks he had conquered
all his powerful enemies--that his eloquence was as great as ever--his
promptitude greater--his diligence indefatigable--his foresight
unslumbering. "He alone," says the biographer, "carried on the affairs
of Rome, but his officials were slothful and cold." This too, tortured
by a painful disease--already--though yet young--broken and infirm. The
only charges against him, as Senator, were the deaths of Montreal and
Pandulfo di Guido, the imposition of the gabelle, and the renunciation
of his former habits of rigid abstinence, for indulgence in wine and
feasting. Of the first charges, the reader has already been enabled to
form a judgment. To the last, alas! the reader must extend indulgence,
and for it he may find excuse. We must compassionate even more than
condemn the man to whom excitement has become nature, and who resorts
to the physical stimulus or the momentary Lethe, when the mental
exhilarations of hope, youth, and glory, begin to desert him. His
alleged intemperance, however, which the Romans (a peculiarly sober
people) might perhaps exaggerate, and for which he gave the excuse of
a thirst produced by disease contracted in the dungeon of
Avignon--evidently and confessedly did not in the least diminish his
attention to business, which, according to his biographer, was at that
time greater than ever.)--is prudent, wary, provident--reigns a few
weeks--taxes the People, in support of the People, and is torn to
pieces! One day of the rule that followed is sufficient to vindicate his
reign and avenge his memory--and for centuries afterwards, whenever that
wretched and degenerate populace dreamed of glory or sighed for justice,
they recalled the bright vision of their own victim, and deplored the
fate of Cola di Rienzi. That he was not a tyrant is clear in this--when
he was dead, he was bitterly regretted. The People never regret a
tyrant! From the unpopularity that springs from other faults there is
often a re-action; but there is no re-action in the populace towards
their betrayor or oppressor. A thousand biographies cannot decide upon
the faults or merits of a ruler like the one fact, whether he is beloved
or hated ten years after he is dead. But if the ruler has been murdered
by the People, and is then regretted by them, their repentance is his
acquittal.

I have said that the moral of the Tribune's life, and of this fiction,
is not the stale and unprofitable moral that warns the ambition of
an individual:--More vast, more solemn, and more useful, it addresses
itself to nations. If I judge not erringly, it proclaims that, to
be great and free, a People must trust not to individuals but
themselves--that there is no sudden leap from servitude to liberty--that
it is to institutions, not to men, for they must look for reforms that
last beyond the hour--that their own passions are the real despots they
should subdue, their own reason the true regenerator of abuses. With a
calm and a noble people, the individual ambition of a citizen can
never effect evil:--to be impatient of chains, is not to be worthy of
freedom--to murder a magistrate is not to ameliorate the laws. (Rienzi
was murdered because the Romans had been in the habit of murdering
whenever they were displeased. They had, very shortly before, stoned one
magistrate, and torn to pieces another. By the same causes and the same
career a People may be made to resemble the bravo whose hand wanders to
his knife at the smallest affront, and if today he poniards the enemy
who assaults him, tomorrow he strikes the friend who would restrain.)
The People write their own condemnation whenever they use characters
of blood; and theirs alone the madness and the crime, if they crown a
tyrant or butcher a victim.




Appendix II. A Word Upon the Work by Pere du Cerceau and Pere Brumoy,

Entitled "Conjuration de Nicolas Gabrini, Dit de Rienzi, Tyran de Rome."

Shortly after the Romance of "Rienzi" first appeared, a translation
of the biography compiled by Cerceau and Brumoy was published by Mr.
Whittaker. The translator, in a short and courteous advertisement,
observes, "That it has always been considered as a work of authority;
and even Gibbon appears to have relied on it without further research:
(Here, however, he does injustice to Gibbon.)...that, "as a record of
facts, therefore, the work will, it is presumed, be acceptable to the
public." The translator has fulfilled his duty with accuracy, elegance,
and spirit,--and he must forgive me, if, in justice to History and
Rienzi, I point out a very few from amongst a great many reasons, why
the joint labour of the two worthy Jesuits cannot be considered either a
work of authority, or a record of facts. The translator observes in his
preface, "that the general outline (of Du Cerceau's work) was probably
furnished by an Italian life written by a contemporary of Rienzi." The
fact, however, is, that Du Cerceau's book is little more than a wretched
paraphrase of that very Italian life mentioned by the translator,--full
of blunders, from ignorance of the peculiar and antiquated dialect in
which the original is written, and of assumptions by the Jesuit himself,
which rest upon no authority whatever. I will first shew, in support
of this assertion, what the Italians themselves think of the work of
Fathers Brumoy and Du Cerceau. The Signor Zefirino Re, who had proved
himself singularly and minutely acquainted with the history of that
time, and whose notes to the "Life of Rienzi" are characterized by
acknowledged acuteness and research, thus describes the manner in which
the two Jesuits compounded this valuable "record of facts."

"Father Du Cerceau for his work made use of a French translation of the
life by the Italian contemporary printed in Bracciano, 1624, executed
by Father Sanadon, another Jesuit, from whom he received the MS.
This proves that Du Cerceau knew little of our 'volgar lingua' of the
fourteenth century. But the errors into which he has run shew, that even
that little was unknown to his guide, and still less to Father Brumoy,
(however learned and reputed the latter might be in French literature,)
who, after the death of Du Cerceau, supplied the deficiencies in the
first pages of the author's MS., which were, I know not how, lost; and
in this part are found the more striking errors in the work, which
shall be noticed in the proper place; in the meantime, one specimen will
suffice. In the third chapter, book i., Cola, addressing the Romans,
says, 'Che lo giubileo si approssima, che se la gente, la quale verra
al giubileo, li trova sproveduti di annona, le pietre (per metatesi sta
scritto le preite) ne porteranno da Roma per rabbia di fame, e le pietre
non basteranno a tanta moltitudine. Il francese traduce. Le
jubile approche, et vous n'avez ni provisions, ni vivres; les
etrangers...trouvent votre ville denue de tout. Ne comptez point sur les
secours des gens d'Eglise; ils sortiront de la ville, s'ils n'y trouvent
de quoi subsister: et d'ailleurs pourroient-ils suffire a la multitude
innombrable, que se trouvera dans vos murs?'" (The English translator
could not fail to adopt the Frenchman's ludicrous mistake.) "Buon Dio!"
exclaims the learned Zefirino, "Buon Dio! le pietre prese per tanta
gente di chiesa!" (See Preface to Zefirino Re's edition of the "Life of
Rienzi," page 9, note on Du Cerceau.)

Another blunder little less extraordinary occurs in Chapter vi., in
which the ordinances of Rienzi's Buono Stato are recited.

It is set forth as the third ordinance:--"Che nulla case di Roma sia
data per terra per alcuna cagione, ma vada in commune;" which simply
means, that the houses of delinquents should in no instance be razed,
but added to the community or confiscated. This law being intended
partly to meet the barbarous violences with which the excesses and
quarrels of the Barons had half dismantled Rome, and principally to
repeal some old penal laws by which the houses of a certain class of
offenders might be destroyed; but the French translator construes it,
"Que nulle maison de Rome ne saroit donnee en propre, pour quelque
raison que ce put etre; mais que les revenus en appartiendroient au
public!" (The English translator makes this law unintelligible:--"That
no family of Rome shall appropriate to their own use what they think
fit, but that the revenues shall appertain to the public"!!!--the
revenues of what?)

But enough of the blunders arising from ignorance.--I must now be
permitted to set before the reader a few of the graver offences of
wilful assumption and preposterous invention.

When Rienzi condemned some of the Barons to death, the Pere thus writes;
I take the recent translation published by Mr. Whittaker:--

"The next day the Tribune, resolving more than ever to rid himself of
his prisoners, ordered tapestries of two colours, red and white, to be
laid over the place whereon he held his councils, and which he had made
choice of to be the theatre of this bloody tragedy, as the extraordinary
tapestry seemed to declare. He afterwards sent a cordelier to every
one of the prisoners to administer the sacraments, and then ordered
the Capitol bell to be tolled. At that fatal sound and the sight of
the confessors, the Lords no longer doubted of sentence of death being
passed upon them. They all confessed except the old Colonna, and many
received the communion. In the meanwhile the people, naturally prompt to
attend, when their first impetuosity had time to calm, could not without
pity behold the dismal preparations which were making. The sight of the
bloody colour in the tapestry shocked them. On this first impression
they joined in opinion in relation to so many illustrious heads now
going to be sacrificed, and lamented more their unhappy catastrophe,
as no crime had been proved upon them to render them worthy of such
barbarous treatment. Above all, the unfortunate Stephen Colonna,
whose birth, age, and affable behaviour, commanded respect, excited a
particular compassion. An universal silence and sorrow reigned among
them. Those who were nearest Rienzi discovered an alteration. They took
the opportunity of imploring his mercy towards the prisoners in terms
the most affecting and moving."

Will it be believed, that in the original from which the Pere Du Cerceau
borrows or rather imagines this touching recital, there is not a single
syllable about the pity of the people, nor their shock at the bloody
colours of the tapestry, nor their particular compassion for the
unfortunate Stephen Colonna?--in fine, the People are not even mentioned
at all. All that is said is, "Some Roman citizens, (alcuni cittadini
Romani,) considering the judgment Rienzi was about to make, interposed
with soft and caressing words, and at last changed the opinion of the
Tribune;" all the rest is the pure fiction of the ingenious Frenchman!
Again, Du Cerceau, describing the appearance of the Barons at this fatal
moment, says, "Notwithstanding the grief and despair visible in their
countenances, they shewed a noble indignation, generally attendant on
innocence in the hour of death." What says the authority from which
alone, except his own, the good Father could take his account? Why, not
a word about this noble indignation, or this parade of innocence! The
original says simply, that "the Barons were so frozen with terror
that they were unable to speak," (diventaso si gelati che non poteano
favellare;) "that the greater part humbled themselves," (e prese
penitenza e comunione;) that when Rienzi addressed them "all the Barons
(come dannati) stood in sadness." (See "Vita di Cola di Rienzi", lib. i.
cap. 29.) Du Cerceau then proceeds to state, that "although he (Rienzi)
was grieved at heart to behold his victims snatched from him, he
endeavoured to make a merit of it in the eyes of the People." There is
not a word of this in the original!

So when Rienzi, on a latter occasion, placed the Prefect John di Vico
in prison, this Jesuit says, "To put a gloss upon this action before
the eyes of the people, Rienzi gave out that the Governor, John di Vico,
keeping a correspondence with the conspirators, came with no other view
than to betray the Romans." And if this scribbler, who pretends to have
consulted the Vatican MSS., had looked at the most ordinary authorities,
he would have seen that John di Vico did come with that view. (See for
Di Vico's secret correspondence with the Barons, La Cron. Bologn. page
406; and La Cron. Est. page 444.)

Again, in the battle between the Barons and the Romans at the gates, Du
Cerceau thus describes the conduct of the Tribune:--"The Tribune, amidst
his troops, knew so little of what had passed, that seeing at a distance
one of his standards fall, he looked upon all as lost, and, casting up
his eyes to heaven full of despair, cried out, 'O God, will you then
forsake me?' But no sooner was he informed of the entire defeat of
his enemies, than his dread and cowardice even turned to boldness and
arrogance."

Now in the original all that is said of this is, "That it is true that
the standard of the Tribune fell--the Tribune astonished, (or if you
please, dismayed, sbigottio,) stood with his eyes raised to heaven, and
could find no other words than, 'O God hast thou betrayed me?'" This
evinced, perhaps, alarm or consternation at the fall of his standard--a
consternation natural, not to a coward, but a fanatic, at such an event.
But not a word is said about Rienzi's cowardice in the action itself;
it is not stated when the accident happened--nothing bears out the
implication that the Tribune was remote from the contest, and knew
little of what passed. And if this ignorant Frenchman had consulted
any other contemporaneous historian whatever, he would have found it
asserted by them all, that the fight was conducted with great valour,
both by the Roman populace and their leader on the one side, and the
Barons on the other.--G. Vill. lib. xii. cap. 105; Cron. Sen. tom. xv.
Murat. page 119; Cron. Est. page 444. Yet Gibbon rests his own sarcasm
on the Tribune's courage solely on the baseless exaggeration of this
Pere Du Cerceau.

So little, indeed, did this French pretender know of the history of the
time and place he treats of, that he imagines the Stephen Colonna who
was killed in the battle above-mentioned was the old Stephen Colonna,
and is very pathetic about his "venerable appearance," &c. This error,
with regard to a man so eminent as Stephen Colonna the elder, is
inexcusable: for, had the priest turned over the other pages of the very
collection in which he found the biography he deforms, he would
have learned that old Stephen Colonna was alive some time after that
battle.--(Cron. Sen. Murat. tom. xv. page 121.)

Again, just before Rienzi's expulsion from the office of Tribune, Du
Cerceau, translating in his headlong way the old biographer's account of
the causes of Rienzi's loss of popularity, says, "He shut himself up in
his palace, and his presence was known only by the rigorous punishments
which he caused his agents to inflict upon the innocent." Not a word of
this in the original!

Again, after the expulsion, Du Cerceau says, that the Barons seized upon
the "immense riches" he had amassed,--the words in the original are,
"grandi ornamenti," which are very different things from immense riches.
But the most remarkable sins of commission are in this person's account
of the second rise and fall of Rienzi under the title of Senator. Of
this I shall give but one instance:--

"The Senator, who perceived it, became only the more cruel. His
jealousies produced only fresh murders. In the continual dread he was
in, that the general discontent would terminate in some secret attempt
upon his person, he determined to intimidate the most enterprising, by
sacrificing sometimes one, sometimes another, and chiefly those whose
riches rendered them the more guilty in his eyes. Numbers were sent
every day to the Capitol prison. Happy were those who could get off with
the confiscation of their estates."

Of these grave charges there is not a syllable in the original! And so
much for the work of Pere Cerceau and Pere Brumoy, by virtue of which,
historians have written of the life and times of Rienzi, and upon the
figments of which, the most remarkable man in an age crowded with great
characters is judged by the general reader!

I must be pardoned for this criticism, which might not have been
necessary, had not the work to which it relates, in the English
translation quoted from, (a translation that has no faults but those
of the French original,) been actually received as an historical and
indisputable authority, and opposed with a triumphant air to some
passages in my own narrative which were literally taken from the
authentic records of the time.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rienzi, by Edward Bulwer Lytton

