deck.  Far and wide, borne by the winds, those showers descended upon
the remotest climes, startling even the swarthy African; and whirled
along the antique soil of Syria and of Egypt (Dion Cassius).



Chapter X

THE NEXT MORNING.  THE FATE OF NYDIA.

AND meekly, softly, beautifully, dawned at last the light over the
trembling deep!--the winds were sinking into rest--the foam died from
the glowing azure of that delicious sea.  Around the east, thin mists
caught gradually the rosy hues that heralded the morning; Light was
about to resume her reign.  Yet, still, dark and massive in the
distance, lay the broken fragments of the destroying cloud, from which
red streaks, burning dimlier and more dim, betrayed the yet rolling
fires of the mountain of the 'Scorched Fields'.  The white walls and
gleaming columns that had adorned the lovely coasts were no more.
Sullen and dull were the shores so lately crested by the cities of
Herculaneum and Pompeii.  The darlings of the deep were snatched from
her embrace!  Century after century shall the mighty Mother stretch
forth her azure arms, and know them not--moaning round the sepulchres of
the Lost!

There was no shout from the mariners at the dawning light--it had come
too gradually, and they were too wearied for such sudden bursts of
joy--but there was a low, deep murmur of thankfulness amidst those
watchers of the long night.  They looked at each other and smiled--they
took heart--they felt once more that there was a world around, and a God
above them!  And in the feeling that the worst was passed, the
overwearied ones turned round, and fell placidly to sleep. In the
growing light of the skies there came the silence which night had
wanted: and the bark drifted calmly onward to its port.  A few other
vessels, bearing similar fugitives, might be seen in the expanse,
apparently motionless, yet gliding also on.  There was a sense of
security, of companionship, and of hope, in the sight of their slender
masts and white sails.  What beloved friends, lost and missed in the
gloom, might they not bear to safety and to shelter!

In the silence of the general sleep, Nydia rose gently.  She bent over
the face of Glaucus--she inhaled the deep breath of his heavy
slumber--timidly and sadly she kissed his brow--his lips; she felt for
his hand--it was locked in that of Ione; she sighed deeply, and her face
darkened. Again she kissed his brow, and with her hair wiped from it the
damps of night.  'May the gods bless you, Athenian!' she murmured: 'may
you be happy with your beloved one!--may you sometimes remember Nydia!
Alas! she is of no further use on earth!'

With these words she turned away.  Slowly she crept along by the fori,
or platforms, to the farther side of the vessel, and, pausing, bent low
over the deep; the cool spray dashed upward on her feverish brow.  'It
is the kiss of death,' she said 'it is welcome.' The balmy air played
through her waving tresses--she put them from her face, and raised those
eyes--so tender, though so lightless--to the sky, whose soft face she
had never seen!

'No, no!' she said, half aloud, and in a musing and thoughtful tone, 'I
cannot endure it; this jealous, exacting love--it shatters my whole soul
in madness!  I might harm him again--wretch that I was!  I have saved
him--twice saved him--happy, happy thought: why not die happy?--it is
the last glad thought I can ever know.  Oh! sacred Sea!  I hear thy
voice invitingly--it hath a freshening and joyous call. They say that in
thy embrace is dishonour--that thy victims cross not the fatal Styx--be
it so!--I would not meet him in the Shades, for I should meet him still
with her!  Rest--rest--rest! there is no other Elysium for a heart like
mine!'

A sailor, half dozing on the deck, heard a slight splash on the waters.
Drowsily he looked up, and behind, as the vessel merrily bounded on, he
fancied he saw something white above the waves; but it vanished in an
instant.  He turned round again, and dreamed of his home and children.

When the lovers awoke, their first thought was of each other--their next
of Nydia!  She was not to be found--none had seen her since the night.
Every crevice of the vessel was searched--there was no trace of her.
Mysterious from first to last, the blind Thessalian had vanished for
ever from the living world!  They guessed her fate in silence: and
Glaucus and Ione, while they drew nearer to each other (feeling each
other the world itself), forgot their deliverance, and wept as for a
departed sister.



Chapter The Last

WHEREIN ALL THINGS CEASE LETTER FROM GLAUCUS TO SALLUST, TEN YEARS AFTER
THE DESTRUCTION OF POMPEII.

'Athens.

GLAUCUS to his beloved Sallust--greeting and health!--You request me to
visit you at Rome--no, Sallust, come rather to me at Athens!  I have
forsworn the Imperial City, its mighty tumult and hollow joys.  In my
own land henceforth I dwell for ever.  The ghost of our departed
greatness is dearer to me than the gaudy life of your loud prosperity.
There is a charm to me which no other spot can supply, in the porticoes
hallowed still by holy and venerable shades.  In the olive-groves of
Ilyssus I still hear the voice of poetry--on the heights of Phyle, the
clouds of twilight seem yet the shrouds of departed freedom--the
heralds--the heralds--of the morrow that shall come!  You smile at my
enthusiasm, Sallust!--better be hopeful in chains than resigned to their
glitter.  You tell me you are sure that I cannot enjoy life in these
melancholy haunts of a fallen majesty.  You dwell with rapture on the
Roman splendors, and the luxuries of the imperial court. My
Sallust--"non sum qualis eram"--I am not what I was!  The events of my
life have sobered the bounding blood of my youth.  My health has never
quite recovered its wonted elasticity ere it felt the pangs of disease,
and languished in the damps of a criminal's dungeon.  My mind has never
shaken off the dark shadow of the Last Day of Pompeii--the horror and
the desolation of that awful ruin!--Our beloved, our remembered Nydia! I
have reared a tomb to her shade, and I see it every day from the window
of my study. It keeps alive in me a tender recollection--a not
unpleasing sadness--which are but a fitting homage to her fidelity, and
the mysteriousness of her early death.  Ione gathers the flowers, but my
own hand wreathes them daily around the tomb.  She was worthy of a tomb
in Athens!

'You speak of the growing sect of the Christians in Rome.  Sallust, to
you I may confide my secret; I have pondered much over that faith--I
have adopted it.  After the destruction of Pompeii, I met once more with
Olinthus--saved, alas! only for a day, and falling afterwards a martyr
to the indomitable energy of his zeal.  In my preservation from the lion
and the earthquake he taught me to behold the hand of the unknown God!
I listened--believed--adored!  My own, my more than ever beloved Ione,
has also embraced the creed!--a creed, Sallust, which, shedding light
over this world, gathers its concentrated glory, like a sunset, over the
next!  We know that we are united in the soul, as in the flesh, for ever
and for ever! Ages may roll on, our very dust be dissolved, the earth
shrivelled like a scroll; but round and round the circle of eternity
rolls the wheel of life--imperishable--unceasing!  And as the earth from
the sun, so immortality drinks happiness from virtue, which is the smile
upon the face of God!  Visit me, then, Sallust; bring with you the
learned scrolls of Epicurus, Pythagoras, Diogenes; arm yourself for
defeat; and let us, amidst the groves of Academus, dispute, under a
surer guide than any granted to our fathers, on the mighty problem of
the true ends of life and the nature of the soul.

'Ione--at that name my heart yet beats!--Ione is by my side as I write:
I lift my eyes, and meet her smile.  The sunlight quivers over Hymettus:
and along my garden I hear the hum of the summer bees.  Am I happy, ask
you? Oh, what can Rome give me equal to what I possess at Athens?  Here,
everything awakens the soul and inspires the affections--the trees, the
waters, the hills, the skies, are those of Athens!--fair, though
mourning-mother of the Poetry and the Wisdom of the World.  In my hall I
see the marble faces of my ancestors.  In the Ceramicus, I survey their
tombs! In the streets, I behold the hand of Phidias and the soul of
Pericles. Harmodius, Aristogiton--they are everywhere--but in our
hearts!--in mine, at least, they shall not perish!  If anything can make
me forget that I am an Athenian and not free, it is partly the
soothing--the love--watchful, vivid, sleepless--of Ione--a love that has
taken a new sentiment in our new creed--a love which none of our poets,
beautiful though they be, had shadowed forth in description; for mingled
with religion, it partakes of religion; it is blended with pure and
unworldly thoughts; it is that which we may hope to carry through
eternity, and keep, therefore, white and unsullied, that we may not
blush to confess it to our God!  This is the true type of the dark fable
of our Grecian Eros and Psyche--it is, in truth, the soul asleep in the
arms of love.  And if this, our love, support me partly against the
fever of the desire for freedom, my religion supports me more; for
whenever I would grasp the sword and sound the shell, and rush to a new
Marathon (but Marathon without victory), I feel my despair at the
chilling thought of my country's impotence--the crushing weight of the
Roman yoke, comforted, at least, by the thought that earth is but the
beginning of life--that the glory of a few years matters little in the
vast space of eternity--that there is no perfect freedom till the chains
of clay fall from the soul, and all space, all time, become its heritage
and domain.  Yet, Sallust, some mixture of the soft Greek blood still
mingles with my faith. I can share not the zeal of those who see crime
and eternal wrath in men who cannot believe as they.  I shudder not at
the creed of others.  I dare not curse them--I pray the Great Father to
convert.  This lukewarmness exposes me to some suspicion amongst the
Christians: but I forgive it; and, not offending openly the prejudices
of the crowd, I am thus enabled to protect my brethren from the danger
of the law, and the consequences of their own zeal.  If moderation seem
to me the natural creature of benevolence, it gives, also, the greatest
scope to beneficence.

'Such, then, O Sallust! is my life--such my opinions.  In this manner I
greet existence and await death.  And thou, glad-hearted and kindly
pupil of Epicurus, thou...  But come hither, and see what enjoyments,
what hopes are ours--and not the splendor of imperial banquets, nor the
shouts of the crowded circus, nor the noisy forum, nor the glittering
theatre, nor the luxuriant gardens, nor the voluptuous baths of
Rome--shall seem to thee to constitute a life of more vivid and
uninterrupted happiness than that which thou so unreasonably pitiest as
the career of Glaucus the Athenian!--Farewell!'

Nearly Seventeen Centuries had rolled away when the City of Pompeii was
disinterred from its silent tomb, all vivid with undimmed hues; its
walls fresh as if painted yesterday--not a hue faded on the rich mosaic
of its floors--in its forum the half-finished columns as left by the
workman's hand--in its gardens the sacrificial tripod--in its halls the
chest of treasure--in its baths the strigil--in its theatres the counter
of admission--in its saloons the furniture and the lamp--in its
triclinia the fragments of the last feast--in its cubicula the perfumes
and the rouge of faded beauty--and everywhere the bones and skeletons of
those who once moved the springs of that minute yet gorgeous machine of
luxury and of life! In the house of Diomed, in the subterranean vaults,
twenty skeletons (one of a babe) were discovered in one spot by the
door, covered by a fine ashen dust, that had evidently been wafted
slowly through the apertures, until it had filled the whole space.
There were jewels and coins, candelabra for unavailing light, and wine
hardened in the amphorae for a prolongation of agonized life.  The sand,
consolidated by damps, had taken the forms of the skeletons as in a
cast; and the traveler may yet see the impression of a female neck and
bosom of young and round proportions--the trace of the fated Julia!  It
seems to the inquirer as if the air had been gradually changed into a
sulphurous vapor; the inmates of the vaults had rushed to the door, to
find it closed and blocked up by the scoria without, and in their
attempts to force it, had been suffocated with the atmosphere.

In the garden was found a skeleton with a key by its bony hand, and near
it a bag of coins.  This is believed to have been the master of the
house--the unfortunate Diomed, who had probably sought to escape by the
garden, and been destroyed either by the vapors or some fragment of
stone.  Beside some silver vases lay another skeleton, probably of a
slave.

The houses of Sallust and of Pansa, the Temple of Isis, with the
juggling concealments behind the statues--the lurking-place of its holy
oracles--are now bared to the gaze of the curious.  In one of the
chambers of that temple was found a huge skeleton with an axe beside it:
two walls had been pierced by the axe--the victim could penetrate no
farther.  In the midst of the city was found another skeleton, by the
side of which was a heap of coins, and many of the mystic ornaments of
the fane of Isis.  Death had fallen upon him in his avarice, and Calenus
perished simultaneously with Burbo!  As the excavators cleared on
through the mass of ruin, they found the skeleton of a man literally
severed in two by a prostrate column; the skull was of so striking a
conformation, so boldly marked in its intellectual as well as its worse
physical developments, that it has excited the constant speculation of
every itinerant believer in the theories of Spurzheim who has gazed upon
that ruined palace of the mind.  Still, after the lapse of ages, the
traveler may survey that airy hall within whose cunning galleries and
elaborate chambers once thought, reasoned, dreamed, and sinned, the soul
of Arbaces the Egyptian.

Viewing the various witnesses of a social system which has passed from
the world for ever--a stranger, from that remote and barbarian Isle
which the Imperial Roman shivered when he named, paused amidst the
delights of the soft Campania and composed this history!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Days of Pompeii, by 
Edward George Bulwer-Lytton

