

Chapter 27: Yuletide At The Cross Way House.


Lady Humbert had got her own way--she generally did when her mind
was set upon a thing--and a large and merry party was assembled
beneath the hospitable roof of the Cross Way House to spend the
festive Yuletide there together.

Sir Richard was not sorry just at this juncture to extend his visit
to these kinswomen, whose known loyalty and adhesion to the
Protestant cause had made the name of Wyvern respected and held in
high repute even at the King's Court. It had been with equal
satisfaction that he had married his eldest daughter Cecilia to Sir
Robert Fortescue, and had allowed Lord Culverhouse openly to
proclaim his betrothal with Kate.

For strange things had been happening in the world of London since
the discovery of that abortive Gunpowder Treason; and, in the first
panic, the name of Trevlyn had freely been whispered abroad. Sir
Richard's friends had trembled for him, and had counselled him to
keep perfectly quiet and let the evil whisper die a natural death
if it would.

For two long weeks the family at the Chase lived upon tenterhooks.
Every day they feared to hear the approach of some messenger with
tidings of woe. There was terror in many hearts when a loud
explosion in the middle of the night roused them all from their
beds; but it was quickly seen that this explosion did not
immediately concern them, and that it must have proceeded from the
old Gate House, which was already wrapped in flames. The servants
hurried down to assist, but were too late. It was only many hours
later that the charred remains of what had once been two human
beings were found amongst the smoking ruins. A whisper went abroad
that a certain well-known seminary priest, by name Father Urban,
had fled from London, and had taken refuge with Nicholas Trevlyn.
It was surmised that the two must have been preparing themselves
for a siege, and that their ammunition had unexpectedly ignited and
caused the catastrophe.

To say that any one deplored the fate of the gloomy old man, who
was supposed to be little better than a maniac, would be going
altogether too far. Petronella shed a few tears, but they were
tears rather of relief than of sorrow; while Sir Richard felt that
he could breathe more freely when his contumacious kinsman had
ceased to live at his door.

The whisper which had alarmed his friends died a natural death so
soon as the real facts connected with the plot came to be known,
and the number and names of the true conspirators discovered.
Indeed, further inquiry appeared to elicit the fact that Cuthbert
Trevlyn had been striving to unravel and expose the plot, and that
he had been shot down by one of the genuine plotters as a spy and a
foe. As he had not since been seen or heard of, considerable
anxiety was felt in some quarters for his safety. Sir Richard was
causing inquiries to be made in London. Cherry was beginning to go
about looking pale and hollow eyed. Lady Humbert, who always
cheerily avowed that everything would come right in time, was
secretly not a little anxious, until a few days before the Yuletide
season, when she was called out into her own back regions to
interview a strange woman who was asking for her, and found herself
face to face with Joanna, the gipsy queen.

For a moment she scarcely knew the woman again, for she had put off
her distinctive dress, and was habited like a simple countrywoman.
Her face, too, had lost its brilliant colouring, and her eyes were
softer than of yore. She told the astonished Lady Humbert that her
mother Miriam was lately dead, that the tribe over whom she ruled
had been dispersed and scattered she knew not whither, and that she
had no wish to gather about her the remnants of the gipsy folk, who
had long been more disposed to consort with robbers and outlaws
than to submit to her sway. She was weary of the old life, and
desired something more tranquil. She asked if she could serve Lady
Humbert in the capacity of dairy woman or laundress, and was
promptly answered in the affirmative.

She then went on to whisper that first she must to London, and that
she would bring back Cuthbert Trevlyn with her, and be with them
again on the Christmas Eve. More than this she would not say; but
Lady Humbert trusted her implicitly, and after that she went about
the house with a bright face and brisk step, laughed at Cherry's
wistful looks, and declared that she would wait no longer for the
absentee, but on Christmas Eve would have up out of the strongroom
all the treasure hidden there, and would hand it over to its lawful
owners, the Trevlyns--Sir Richard, as head of the house, being the
fittest person now to have charge of it.

There was a little murmur of remonstrance, Cuthbert's name being
mentioned. Was it fair to do anything till he returned? But some
persons began to fear he never would be seen again. All were deeply
interested in the treasure; and Lady Humbert clinched the matter by
declaring that her mind was made up, and that she would do as she
had said.

What a wonderful sight it was as piece after piece of rich old
plate, some gold, some silver, all richly chased and embossed, was
brought by the servants and placed by Lady Humbert's direction upon
the long tables in the old banqueting hall, now unused for half a
century! Breathless and wondering, the Trevlyns stood by watching,
Sir Richard exclaiming in delighted recognition of various family
heirlooms he had often heard described, and which transcended even
the fancies he had formed about them. And, besides the wonderful
plate, there were jewels and gold in abundance, small coffers
filled with golden coins and precious stones, sufficient for a
king's ransom.

Kate stood clinging to Culverhouse's arm, her eyes as bright as
stars. It was to her the realization of a wonderful dream; and as
she gazed and gazed upon the sparkling hoard, which she knew would
smooth her own path in life and that of the lover of her choice,
she glanced up at him with kindling glances to say:

"Nay, but what a splendid treasure! I never dreamed of aught like
this! But oh, it seems to spoil it all not to have Cuthbert! It was
he who found it, when nearly all the rest of the world derided the
hope of such a thing. Oh, why is he not here to be with us today?"

"Why not, indeed?"

A door at the far end of the room was thrown suddenly open. Lady
Humbert, who had withdrawn herself for a few moments, came forward
smiling and beaming, and behind her--who?

Petronella, who was standing at Philip's side, not far away,
uttered a quick, sharp cry of rapture, and flung herself into
Cuthbert's arms.

"Cuthbert!" cried Kate, with a forward bound; and the next minute
Cuthbert was surrounded by a crowd of eager questioners, and so
belaboured with greetings, inquiries, and congratulations that he
himself could not get in a word, but stood looking smilingly from
one to another till his eyes met the eager, wistful glance of a
pair of limpid blue ones, and with a quick cry of "Cherry!" he
shook off the detaining clasp of all other hands, and went straight
across to the spot where she stood blushing, quivering, and hardly
able to believe the evidences of her senses.

All made way for him smilingly, for the secret of his love was an
open one now, and Cherry had endeared herself to all the family by
her gentleness and pretty, clinging ways.

"Sweetheart," he said, "I come to claim thee at last, and to claim
thee with thy good father's ready consent and promised blessing.
Cherry, it is to Jacob's devotion and generosity that we owe this
happiness, for he it was who saved my life, and might well have
risked his own to do so. But he thought not of that; he only
thought how he might serve me, and redeem a promise he had made to
thee. And now he has his reward. He was wedded to thy sister a
short week back, being unwilling to wait longer. And he bids me
give thee a brother's love and greeting, hoping that thou wilt find
a place for a brother in thine heart, and wilt give to him a
sister's love."

"Oh, that indeed I will! Good Jacob! kind Jacob!" cried Cherry,
who, bewildered by this rush of happiness, scarce knew what she
said or did; but it was enough that she had Cuthbert back again
safe and sound.

To her the voices questioning and exclaiming and eagerly displaying
to her lover the treasure he had never been able to examine and had
never seen massed together, sounded like the murmur of troubled
waters. She stood with Cuthbert's hand in hers, gazing at him as
one in a dream, and it was only when Lady Humbert took her hand and
imprinted a kiss upon her cheek that she seemed suddenly to awake
from her trance.

"There, little one! I trow thou dost not half know what is in store
for thee! We shall lose our merry Kate, who must be transformed
into the Viscountess Culverhouse, instead of going home chastened
and repentant for her mad folly, as was once hoped, after her
imprisonment here. And as for our quiet Petronella, she too is to
find a home of her own with Master Philip, whose share of this
golden treasure will give him all he needs. But as for thee, little
one, Cross Way House will still be thy home; for Cuthbert will be
content to abide here with us so long as we live, and reign here
with thee after we are gone.

"So thou wilt still be beneath the stern rule of an aunt, little
one. How wilt thou like that? But thou wilt have a husband to
protect thee, so that thou needest not fear too greatly.

"Say, pretty child, art thou content with Cross Way House for a
home; or dost thou wish to seek for another?"

Cherry's answer was to put her arms timidly but lovingly about Lady
Humbert's neck, as she answered, with a little sob of pure
happiness:

"With Cuthbert I should be happy anywhere, and I love Cross Way
House dearly. If you will have me, I will gladly stay and strive to
be a daughter to you and Mistress Dowsabel. It is all like some
wonderful, beautiful dream. I never thought the lost treasure of
Trevlyn could bring such happiness with it!"

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lost Treasure of Trevlyn
by Evelyn Everett-Green

