certainly come, for that regarding Rupert as a son it would be
extraordinary indeed for him to be absent. And so they arrived at
the Chace two days before the wedding, and on the morning before
going to church he presented Rupert with a cheque which simply
astounded the young soldier.

At first, indeed, he absolutely refused to accept it. The merchant,
however, insisted so strongly upon it--urging that his own wealth
was so large, that, as he had only Maria to inherit it, it was
really beyond his wants, or even his power to spend; and that he
had, ever since Rupert saved Maria from the attempts of Sir Richard
Fulke, which but for him must have succeeded, regarded him as his
adopted son--Rupert saw that his refusal would really give pain and
therefore, with warm gratitude, he accepted the cheque, whose value
exceeded that of the united estates of the Haugh and the Chace.
Maria brought a magnificent set of jewels for Adele--not indeed
that that young lady in any way required them, for the marquis had
had all her mother's jewels, which were superb, reset for the
occasion. They were married first at the Roman Catholic chapel at
Derby, for Adele was of course a Catholic, and then at the church
in the village of Windthorpe. After which there was a great dinner,
and much rejoicing and festivity at it.

Rupert Holliday went no more to the wars. He obtained leave to
reside on his estate for a year. That year, 1710, little was done
in Flanders. The duke's enemies at home had now gained the upper
hand, and he was hampered in every way. The allies, seeing that a
change of government was imminent in England, and that the new
party would in all probability make peace at any cost and leave
them to themselves, carried on quiet negotiations with France; and
so throughout the summer no great battle took place, although the
allies gained several material advantages.

In the following year envy, intrigue, and a woman's spite,
conquered. Godolphin fell, and the new ministry hastened to make
the most disgraceful peace recorded in the annals of the history of
this country. By it the allies of England were virtually deserted,
and the fruits of ten years of struggle and of victory for the most
part abandoned. Marlborough refused to sign the disgraceful peace
of Utrecht and, exiled and disgraced, lived quietly on the
continent until the death of Anne, a living monument of national
injustice. When George the First ascended the throne, the hero was
recalled, and remained the war minister of the country until within
a year or two of his death, honoured and loved by the people for
whom he had done so much.

There is little more to tell about Rupert Holliday. His grandfather
lived until past ninety years of age, and Madame Holliday died
suddenly a few weeks after her father in law. Rupert was now one of
the largest landowners in the country, and was one of the most
popular men. The home farm round the Chace was held for generations
by the Parsons, for Hugh married not many months after his master.

At the death of Louis, the Marquis de Pignerolles passed over again
to France, and there, at least when England and France were at
peace, Colonel Rupert Holliday and his wife paid him long visits.
As his daughter had married a foreigner she could not inherit the
estates, which went to a distant relation; but at the death of the
marquis, at a good old age, he left a fortune to his daughter,
which enabled her husband still further to extend his estates. Had
Rupert desired it, he could have been raised to the peerage, but he
preferred remaining one of the wealthiest private gentlemen in
England.

From time to time they received visits from Major Dillon and his
wife, both of whom were great favourites with the young Hollidays.
Between Rupert and Hugh a real affection prevailed all through
their lives, and the latter was never so happy as when the children
first, and, years after, the grandchildren, of Rupert and Adele
came down to the farm to eat cake, drink syllabub, and listen to
wonderful tales about the doings of the "Cornet of Horse."



