grew from a child into a young woman, her liking for you seemed to
ripen into affection. This afternoon I have spoken to her, and she has
acknowledged that she would obey my commands, to regard you as her
future husband, with gladness.

"I could not, however, offer my daughter's hand to one who might reject
it, or who, if he accepted it, would only do so because he considered
the match to be a desirable one, from a business point of view. Now
that you have told me you love her, all difficulties are at an end. I
am not one of those fathers who would force a marriage upon their
daughters, regardless of their feelings. I gave to Maria free choice
among her various suitors, and so I would give it to Giulia. Her choice
is in accordance with my own secret hopes, and I therefore, freely and
gladly, bestow her upon you. You must promise only that you do not
carry her away altogether to England, so long as I live. You can, if
you like, pay long visits with her from time to time to your native
country, but make Venice your headquarters.

"I need say nothing to you about her dowry. I intended that, as my
partner, you should take a fourth share of the profits of the business;
but as Giulia's husband, I shall now propose that you have a third.
This will give you an income equal to that of all but the wealthiest of
the nobles of Venice. At my death, my fortune will be divided between
my girls."

Francis expressed, in a few words, his joy and gratitude at the
merchant's offer. Giulia had inspired him, four years before, with a
boyish love, and it had steadily increased until he felt that, however
great his success in life as Messer Polani's partner, his happiness
would be incomplete unless shared by Giulia. Polani cut short his words
by saying:

"My dear boy, I am as pleased that this should be so as you are. I now
feel that I have, indeed, gained a son and secured the happiness of my
daughter. Go in to her now. You will find her in the embroidery room. I
told her that I should speak to you this evening, and she is doubtless
in a tremble as to the result, for she told me frankly that, although
she loved you, she feared you only regarded her with the affection of a
brother, and she implored me, above all, not to give you a hint of her
feelings towards you, until I was convinced that you really loved her."

Two months later, the marriage of Francis Hammond and Giulia Polani
took place. There were great festivities, and the merchant spent a
considerable sum in giving a feast, on the occasion, to all the poor of
Venice. Maria told Francis, in confidence, that she had always made up
her mind that he would marry Giulia.

"The child was silly enough to fall in love with you from the first,
Francisco, and I was sure that you, in your dull English fashion, cared
for her. My father confided to me, long since, that he hoped it would
come about."

Francis Hammond lived for many years with his wife in Venice, paying
occasional visits to England. He was joined, soon after his marriage,
by his brother, who, after serving for some years in the business,
entered it as a partner, when Messer Polani's increasing years rendered
it necessary for him to retire from an active participation in it.

Some months after his marriage, Francis was saddened by the death of
Admiral Pisani, who never recovered from the fatigue and hardships he
suffered during the siege of Chioggia. He had, with the fleet,
recovered most of the places that the Genoese had captured, and after
chasing a Genoese fleet to Zara, had a partial engagement with them
there. In this, Corbaro, now holding the commission of admiral of the
squadron, was killed, and Pisani himself wounded. He was already
suffering from fever; and the loss of Corbaro, and the check that the
fleet had suffered, increased his malady, and he expired three days
later.

Venice made peace with Genoa, but the grudge which she bore to Padua
was not wiped out until some years later, when, in 1404, that city was
besieged by the Venetians, and forced by famine to surrender in the
autumn of the following year; after which Zeno, having been proved to
have kept up secret communications with the Lord of Padua, was deprived
of his honours and sentenced to a year's imprisonment. Thus, in turn,
the two great Venetian commanders suffered disgrace and imprisonment.

As she had been patient and steadfast in her time of distress, Venice
was clement in her hour of triumph, and granted far more favourable
terms to Padua than that city deserved.

At the death of Messer Polani, Francis returned with his wife and
family to England, and established himself in London, where he at once
took rank as one of the leading merchants. His fortune, however, was so
large, that he had no occasion to continue in commerce, and he did so
only to afford him a certain amount of occupation. His brother carried
on the business in Venice, and became one of the leading citizens
there, in partnership with Matteo Giustiniani. Every two or three years
Francis made a voyage with his wife to Venice and spent some months
there, and to the end of his life never broke off his close connection
with the City of the Waters.



