told me that had it not been for the wide lands and moneys which
she must manage as my heiress, she would have betaken herself to a
sisterhood, there to wear her life away in peace, since I being lost to
her, and indeed dead, as she was assured,--for the news of the wreck
of the carak found its way to Ditchingham,--she no longer thought of
marriage, though more than one gentleman of condition had sought her
hand. This, with some minor matters, such as the birth and death of
children, and the story of the great storm and flood that smote Bungay,
and indeed the length of the vale of Waveney in those days, was all the
tale that they had to tell who had grown from youth to middle age in
quiet. For of the crowning and end of kings and of matters politic, such
as the downfall of the power of the Pope of Rome and the sacking of the
religious houses which was still in progress, I make no mention here.

But now they called for mine, and I began it at the beginning, and it
was strange to see their faces as they listened. All night long, till
the thrushes sang down the nightingales, and the dawn shone in the
east, I sat at Lily's side telling them my story, and then it was not
finished. So we slept in the chambers that had been made ready for us,
and on the morrow I took it up again, showing them the sword that had
belonged to Bernal Diaz, the great necklace of emeralds which Guatemoc
had given to me, and certain scars and wounds in witness of its truth.
Never did I see folk so much amazed, and when I came to speak of the
last sacrifice of the women of the Otomie, and of the horrid end of de
Garcia who died fighting with his own shadow, or rather with the shadows
of his own wickedness, they cried aloud with fear, as they wept when I
told of the deaths of Isabella de Siguenza and of Guatemoc, and of the
loss of my sons.

But I did not tell all the story to this company, for some of it was for
Lily's ear alone, and to her I spoke of my dealings with Otomie as a
man might speak with a man, for I felt that if I kept anything back now
there would never be complete faith between us. Therefore I set out
all my doubts and troublings, nor did I hide that I had learned to love
Otomie, and that her beauty and sweetness had drawn me from the first
moment when I saw her in the court of Montezuma, or that which had
passed between us on the stone of sacrifice.

When I had done Lily thanked me for my honesty and said it seemed that
in such matters men differed from women, seeing that SHE had never felt
the need to be delivered from the temptation of strange loves. Still we
were as God and Nature had made us, and therefore had little right to
reproach each other, or even to set that down as virtue which was
but lack of leaning. Moreover, this Otomie, her sin of heathenism
notwithstanding, had been a great-hearted woman and one who might well
dazzle the wandering eyes of man, daring more for her love's sake than
ever she, Lily, could have dared; and to end with, it was clear that at
last I must choose between wedding her and a speedy death, and having
sworn so great an oath to her I should have been perjured indeed if
I had left her when my dangers were gone by. Therefore she, Lily, was
minded to let all this matter rest, nor should she be jealous if I still
thought of this dead wife of mine with tenderness.

Thus she spoke most sweetly, looking at me the while with her clear
and earnest eyes, that I ever fancied must be such as adorn the shining
faces of angels. Ay, and those same eyes of hers were filled with tears
when I told her my bitter grief over the death of my firstborn and of my
other bereavements. For it was not till some years afterwards, when she
had abandoned further hope of children, that Lily grew jealous of those
dead sons of mine and of my ever present love for them.


Now the tidings of my return and of my strange adventures among the
nations of the Indies were noised abroad far and wide, and people came
from miles round, ay, even from Norwich and Yarmouth, to see me and I
was pressed to tell my tale till I grew weary of it. Also a service of
thanksgiving for my safe deliverance from many dangers by land and sea
was held in the church of St. Mary's here in Ditchingham, which service
was no longer celebrated after the rites of the Romish faith, for while
I had sojourned afar, the saints were fallen like the Aztec gods; the
yoke of Rome had been broken from off the neck of England, and though
all do not think with me, I for one rejoiced at it heartily who had seen
enough of priestcraft and its cruelties.

When that ceremony was over and all people had gone to their homes, I
came back again to the empty church from the Hall, where I abode a while
as the guest of my sister and her husband, till Lily and I were wed.

And there in the quiet light of the June evening I knelt in the chancel
upon the rushes that strewed the grave of my father and my mother, and
sent my spirit up towards them in the place of their eternal rest, and
to the God who guards them. A great calm came upon me as I knelt thus,
and I felt how mad had been that oath of mine that as a lad I had sworn
to be avenged upon de Garcia, and I saw how as a tree from a seed, all
my sorrows had grown from it. But even then I could not do other than
hate de Garcia, no, nor can I to this hour, and after all it was natural
that I should desire vengeance on the murderer of my mother though the
wreaking of it had best been left in another Hand.

Without the little chancel door I met Lily, who was lingering there
knowing me to be within, and we spoke together.

'Lily,' I said, 'I would ask you something. After all that has been,
will you still take me for your husband, unworthy as I am?'

'I promised so to do many a year ago, Thomas,' she answered, speaking
very low, and blushing like the wild rose that bloomed upon a grave
beside her, 'and I have never changed my mind. Indeed for many years I
have looked upon you as my husband, though I thought you dead.'

'Perhaps it is more than I deserve,' I said. 'But if it is to be, say
when it shall be, for youth has left us and we have little time to
lose.'

'When you will, Thomas,' she answered, placing her hand in mine.

Within a week from that evening we were wed.


And now my tale is done. God who gave me so sad and troublous a youth
and early manhood, has blessed me beyond measure in my middle age and
eld. All these events of which I have written at such length were done
with many a day ago: the hornbeam sapling that I set beneath these
windows in the year when we were married is now a goodly tree of shade
and still I live to look on it. Here in the happy valley of the Waveney,
save for my bitter memories and that longing for the dead which no time
can so much as dull, year after year has rolled over my silvering hairs
in perfect health and peace and rest, and year by year have I rejoiced
more deeply in the true love of a wife such as few have known. For
it would seem as though the heart-ache and despair of youth had but
sweetened that most noble nature till it grew well nigh divine. But one
sorrow came to us, the death of our infant child--for it was fated that
I should die childless--and in that sorrow, as I have told, Lily shewed
that she was still a woman. For the rest no shadow lay between us. Hand
in hand we passed down the hill of life, till at length in the fulness
of her days my wife was taken from me. One Christmas night she lay down
to sleep at my side, in the morning she was dead. I grieved indeed and
bitterly, but the sorrow was not as the sorrows of my youth had been,
since age and use dull the edge of mortal griefs and I knew and know
that we are no long space apart. Very soon I shall join Lily where she
is, and I do not fear that journey. For the dread of death has left me
at length, as it departs from all who live long enough and strive to
repent them of their sins, and I am well content to leave my safety at
the Gates and my heavenly comfort in the Almighty Hand that saved me
from the stone of sacrifice and has guided me through so many perils
upon this troubled earth.

And now to God my Father, Who holds me, Thomas Wingfield, and all I
have loved and love in His holy keeping, be thanks and glory and praise!
Amen.





End of Project Gutenberg's Montezuma's Daughter, by H. Rider Haggard

