the cove at Lundy."

"Will you tell me that that is not the Shutter, and that the
Devil's-limekiln, and that the cliff--that villain Spaniard only
gone--and that Yeo is not standing here by me, and Cary there forward,
and--why, by the by, where are you, Jack Brimblecombe, who were talking
to me this minute?"

"Oh, Sir Amyas Leigh, dear Sir Amyas Leigh," blubbered poor Jack, "put
out your hand, and feel where you are, and pray the Lord to forgive you
for your wilfulness!"

A great trembling fell upon Amyas Leigh; half fearfully he put out his
hand; he felt that he was in his hammock, with the deck beams close
above his head. The vision which had been left upon his eye-balls
vanished like a dream.

"What is this? I must be asleep? What has happened? Where am I?"

"In your cabin, Amyas," said Cary.

"What? And where is Yeo?"

"Yeo is gone where he longed to go, and as he longed to go. The same
flash which struck you down, struck him dead."

"Dead? Lightning? Any more hurt? I must go and see. Why, what is this?"
and Amyas passed his hand across his eyes. "It is all dark--dark, as I
live!" And he passed his hand over his eyes again.

There was another dead silence. Amyas broke it.

"Oh, God!" shrieked the great proud sea-captain, "Oh, God, I am blind!
blind! blind!" And writhing in his great horror, he called to Cary to
kill him and put him out of his misery, and then wailed for his
mother to come and help him, as if he had been a boy once more; while
Brimblecombe and Cary, and the sailors who crowded round the cabin-door,
wept as if they too had been boys once more.

Soon his fit of frenzy passed off, and he sank back exhausted.

They lifted him into their remaining boat, rowed him ashore, carried him
painfully up the hill to the old castle, and made a bed for him on
the floor, in the very room in which Don Guzman and Rose Salterne had
plighted their troth to each other, five wild years before.

Three miserable days were passed within that lonely tower. Amyas,
utterly unnerved by the horror of his misfortune, and by the
over-excitement of the last few weeks, was incessantly delirious; while
Cary, and Brimblecombe, and the men nursed him by turns, as sailors
and wives only can nurse; and listened with awe to his piteous
self-reproaches and entreaties to Heaven to remove that woe, which,
as he shrieked again and again, was a just judgment on him for his
wilfulness and ferocity. The surgeon talked, of course, learnedly about
melancholic humors, and his liver's being "adust by the over-pungency
of the animal spirits," and then fell back on the universal panacea of
blood-letting, which he effected with fear and trembling during a short
interval of prostration; encouraged by which he attempted to administer
a large bolus of aloes, was knocked down for his pains, and then thought
it better to leave Nature to her own work. In the meanwhile, Cary had
sent off one of the island skiffs to Clovelly, with letters to his
father, and to Mrs. Leigh, entreating the latter to come off to the
island: but the heavy westerly winds made that as impossible as it was
to move Amyas on board, and the men had to do their best, and did it
well enough.

On the fourth day his raving ceased: but he was still too weak to be
moved. Toward noon, however, he called for food, ate a little, and
seemed revived.

"Will," he said, after awhile, "this room is as stifling as it is dark.
I feel as if I should be a sound man once more if I could but get one
snuff of the sea-breeze."

The surgeon shook his head at the notion of moving him: but Amyas was
peremptory.

"I am captain still, Tom Surgeon, and will sail for the Indies, if I
choose. Will Cary, Jack Brimblecombe, will you obey a blind general?"

"What you will in reason," said they both at once.

"Then lead me out, my masters, and over the down to the south end.
To the point at the south end I must go; there is no other place will
suit."

And he rose firmly to his feet, and held out his hands for theirs.

"Let him have his humor," whispered Cary. "It may be the working off of
his madness."

"This sudden strength is a note of fresh fever, Mr. Lieutenant,"
said the surgeon, "and the rules of the art prescribe rather a fresh
blood-letting."

Amyas overheard the last word, and broke out:

"Thou pig-sticking Philistine, wilt thou make sport with blind Samson?
Come near me to let blood from my arm, and see if I do not let blood
from thy coxcomb. Catch him, Will, and bring him me here!"

The surgeon vanished as the blind giant made a step forward; and they
set forth, Amyas walking slowly, but firmly, between his two friends.

"Whither?" asked Cary.

"To the south end. The crag above the Devil's-limekiln. No other place
will suit."

Jack gave a murmur, and half-stopped, as a frightful suspicion crossed
him.

"That is a dangerous place!"

"What of that?" said Amyas, who caught his meaning in his tone. "Dost
think I am going to leap over cliff? I have not heart enough for that.
On, lads, and set me safe among the rocks."

So slowly, and painfully, they went on, while Amyas murmured to himself:

"No, no other place will suit; I can see all thence."

So on they went to the point, where the cyclopean wall of granite cliff
which forms the western side of Lundy, ends sheer in a precipice of some
three hundred feet, topped by a pile of snow-white rock, bespangled with
golden lichens. As they approached, a raven, who sat upon the topmost
stone, black against the bright blue sky, flapped lazily away, and sank
down the abysses of the cliff, as if he scented the corpses underneath
the surge. Below them from the Gull-rock rose a thousand birds, and
filled the air with sound; the choughs cackled, the hacklets wailed,
the great blackbacks laughed querulous defiance at the intruders, and a
single falcon, with an angry bark, dashed out from beneath their feet,
and hung poised high aloft, watching the sea-fowl which swung slowly
round and round below.

It was a glorious sight upon a glorious day. To the northward the glens
rushed down toward the cliff, crowned with gray crags, and carpeted with
purple heather and green fern; and from their feet stretched away to
the westward the sapphire rollers of the vast Atlantic, crowned with a
thousand crests of flying foam. On their left hand, some ten miles to
the south, stood out against the sky the purple wall of Hartland cliffs,
sinking lower and lower as they trended away to the southward along the
lonely ironbound shores of Cornwall, until they faded, dim and blue,
into the blue horizon forty miles away.

The sky was flecked with clouds, which rushed toward them fast upon the
roaring south-west wind; and the warm ocean-breeze swept up the cliffs,
and whistled through the heather-bells, and howled in cranny and in
crag,

     "Till the pillars and clefts of the granite
        Rang like a God-swept lyre;"

while Amyas, a proud smile upon his lips, stood breasting that genial
stream of airy wine with swelling nostrils and fast-heaving chest,
and seemed to drink in life from every gust. All three were silent for
awhile; and Jack and Cary, gazing downward with delight upon the glory
and the grandeur of the sight, forgot for awhile that their companion
saw it not. Yet when they started sadly, and looked into his face, did
he not see it? So wide and eager were his eyes, so bright and calm his
face, that they fancied for an instant that he was once more even as
they.

A deep sigh undeceived them. "I know it is all here--the dear old sea,
where I would live and die. And my eyes feel for it; feel for it--and
cannot find it; never, never will find it again forever! God's will be
done!"

"Do you say that?" asked Brimblecombe, eagerly.

"Why should I not? Why have I been raving in hell-fire for I know not
how many days, but to find out that, John Brimblecombe, thou better man
than I?"

"Not that last: but Amen! Amen! and the Lord has indeed had mercy upon
thee!" said Jack, through his honest tears.

"Amen!" said Amyas. "Now set me where I can rest among the rocks
without fear of falling--for life is sweet still, even without eyes,
friends--and leave me to myself awhile."

It was no easy matter to find a safe place; for from the foot of the
crag the heathery turf slopes down all but upright, on one side to a
cliff which overhangs a shoreless cove of deep dark sea, and on the
other to an abyss even more hideous, where the solid rock has sunk away,
and opened inland in the hillside a smooth-walled pit, some sixty feet
square and some hundred and fifty in depth, aptly known then as now,
as the Devil's-limekiln; the mouth of which, as old wives say, was once
closed by the Shutter-rock itself, till the fiend in malice hurled it
into the sea, to be a pest to mariners. A narrow and untrodden cavern at
the bottom connects it with the outer sea; they could even then hear the
mysterious thunder and gurgle of the surge in the subterranean adit,
as it rolled huge boulders to and fro in darkness, and forced before it
gusts of pent-up air. It was a spot to curdle weak blood, and to make
weak heads reel: but all the fitter on that account for Amyas and his
fancy.

"You can sit here as in an arm-chair," said Cary, helping him down to
one of those square natural seats so common in the granite tors.

"Good; now turn my face to the Shutter. Be sure and exact. So. Do I face
it full?"

"Full," said Cary.

"Then I need no eyes wherewith to see what is before me," said he, with
a sad smile. "I know every stone and every headland, and every wave too,
I may say, far beyond aught that eye can reach. Now go, and leave me
alone with God and with the dead!"

They retired a little space and watched him. He never stirred for many
minutes; then leaned his elbows on his knees, and his head upon his
hands, and so was still again. He remained so long thus, that the pair
became anxious, and went towards him. He was asleep, and breathing quick
and heavily.

"He will take a fever," said Brimblecombe, "if he sleeps much longer
with his head down in the sunshine."

"We must wake him gently if we wake him at all." And Cary moved forward
to him.

As he did so, Amyas lifted his head, and turning it to right and left,
felt round him with his sightless eyes.

"You have been asleep, Amyas."

"Have I? I have not slept back my eyes, then. Take up this great useless
carcase of mine, and lead me home. I shall buy me a dog when I get to
Burrough, I think, and make him tow me in a string, eh? So! Give me your
hand. Now march!"

His guides heard with surprise this new cheerfulness.

"Thank God, sir, that your heart is so light already," said good Jack;
"it makes me feel quite upraised myself, like."

"I have reason to be cheerful, Sir John; I have left a heavy load behind
me. I have been wilful, and proud, and a blasphemer, and swollen with
cruelty and pride; and God has brought me low for it, and cut me off
from my evil delight. No more Spaniard-hunting for me now, my masters.
God will send no such fools as I upon His errands."

"You do not repent of fighting the Spaniards."

"Not I: but of hating even the worst of them. Listen to me, Will and
Jack. If that man wronged me, I wronged him likewise. I have been a
fiend when I thought myself the grandest of men, yea, a very avenging
angel out of heaven. But God has shown me my sin, and we have made up
our quarrel forever."

"Made it up?"

"Made it up, thank God. But I am weary. Set me down awhile, and I will
tell you how it befell."

Wondering, they set him down upon the heather, while the bees hummed
round them in the sun; and Amyas felt for a hand of each, and clasped it
in his own hand, and began:

"When you left me there upon the rock, lads, I looked away and out to
sea, to get one last snuff of the merry sea-breeze, which will never
sail me again. And as I looked, I tell you truth, I could see the water
and the sky; as plain as ever I saw them, till I thought my sight was
come again. But soon I knew it was not so; for I saw more than man could
see; right over the ocean, as I live, and away to the Spanish Main. And
I saw Barbados, and Grenada, and all the isles that we ever sailed by;
and La Guayra in Caracas, and the Silla, and the house beneath it where
she lived. And I saw him walking with her on the barbecue, and he loved
her then. I saw what I saw; and he loved her; and I say he loves her
still.

"Then I saw the cliffs beneath me, and the Gull-rock, and the Shutter,
and the Ledge; I saw them, William Cary, and the weeds beneath the merry
blue sea. And I saw the grand old galleon, Will; she has righted with
the sweeping of the tide. She lies in fifteen fathoms, at the edge of
the rocks, upon the sand; and her men are all lying around her, asleep
until the judgment-day."

Cary and Jack looked at him, and then at each other. His eyes were
clear, and bright, and full of meaning; and yet they knew that he
was blind. His voice was shaping itself into a song. Was he inspired?
Insane? What was it? And they listened with awe-struck faces, as the
giant pointed down into the blue depths far below, and went on.

"And I saw him sitting in his cabin, like a valiant gentleman of Spain;
and his officers were sitting round him, with their swords upon the
table at the wine. And the prawns and the crayfish and the rockling,
they swam in and out above their heads: but Don Guzman he never heeded,
but sat still, and drank his wine. Then he took a locket from his bosom;
and I heard him speak, Will, and he said: 'Here's the picture of my fair
and true lady; drink to her, senors all.' Then he spoke to me, Will,
and called me, right up through the oar-weed and the sea: 'We have had
a fair quarrel, senor; it is time to be friends once more. My wife and
your brother have forgiven me; so your honor takes no stain.' And I
answered, 'We are friends, Don Guzman; God has judged our quarrel and
not we.' Then he said, 'I sinned, and I am punished.' And I said, 'And,
senor, so am I.' Then he held out his hand to me, Cary; and I stooped to
take it, and awoke."

He ceased: and they looked in his face again. It was exhausted, but
clear and gentle, like the face of a new-born babe. Gradually his head
dropped upon his breast again; he was either swooning or sleeping, and
they had much ado to get him home. There he lay for eight-and-forty
hours, in a quiet doze; then arose suddenly, called for food, ate
heartily, and seemed, saving his eyesight, as whole and sound as ever.
The surgeon bade them get him home to Northam as soon as possible,
and he was willing enough to go. So the next day the Vengeance sailed,
leaving behind a dozen men to seize and keep in the queen's name any
goods which should be washed up from the wreck.



CHAPTER XXXIII

HOW AMYAS LET THE APPLE FALL

     "Would you hear a Spanish lady,
       How she woo'd an Englishman?
     Garments gay and rich as may be,
        Deck'd with jewels had she on."

                   Elizabethan Ballad.

It was the first of October. The morning was bright and still; the skies
were dappled modestly from east to west with soft gray autumn cloud, as
if all heaven and earth were resting after those fearful summer months
of battle and of storm. Silently, as if ashamed and sad, the Vengeance
slid over the bar, and passed the sleeping sand-hills and dropped her
anchor off Appledore, with her flag floating half-mast high; for the
corpse of Salvation Yeo was on board.

A boat pulled off from the ship, and away to the western end of the
strand; and Cary and Brimblecombe helped out Amyas Leigh, and led him
slowly up the hill toward his home.

The crowd clustered round him, with cheers and blessings, and sobs of
pity from kind-hearted women; for all in Appledore and Bideford knew
well by this time what had befallen him.

"Spare me, my good friends," said Amyas, "I have landed here that I
might go quietly home, without passing through the town, and being made
a gazing-stock. Think not of me, good folks, nor talk of me; but come
behind me decently, as Christian men, and follow to the grave the body
of a better man than I."

And, as he spoke, another boat came off, and in it, covered with the
flag of England, the body of Salvation Yeo.

The people took Amyas at his word; and a man was sent on to Burrough, to
tell Mrs. Leigh that her son was coming. When the coffin was landed
and lifted, Amyas and his friends took their places behind it as chief
mourners, and the crew followed in order, while the crowd fell in behind
them, and gathered every moment; till ere they were halfway to Northam
town, the funeral train might number full five hundred souls.

They had sent over by a fishing-skiff the day before to bid the sexton
dig the grave; and when they came into the churchyard, the parson stood
ready waiting at the gate.

Mrs. Leigh stayed quietly at home; for she had no heart to face the
crowd; and though her heart yearned for her son, yet she was well
content (when was she not content?) that he should do honor to his
ancient and faithful servant; so she sat down in the bay-window, with
Ayacanora by her side; and when the tolling of the bell ceased, she
opened her Prayer-book, and began to read the Burial-service.

"Ayacanora," she said, "they are burying old Master Yeo, who loved you,
and sought you over the wide, wide world, and saved you from the teeth
of the crocodile. Are you not sorry for him, child, that you look so gay
to-day?"

Ayacanora blushed, and hung down her head; she was thinking of nothing,
poor child, but Amyas.

The Burial-service was done; the blessing said; the parson drew back:
but the people lingered and crowded round to look at the coffin, while
Amyas stood still at the head of the grave. It had been dug by his
command, at the west end of the church, near by the foot of the tall
gray windswept tower, which watches for a beacon far and wide over land
and sea. Perhaps the old man might like to look at the sea, and see
the ships come out and in across the bar, and hear the wind, on winter
nights, roar through the belfry far above his head. Why not? It was but
a fancy: and yet Amyas felt that he too should like to be buried in such
a place; so Yeo might like it also.

Still the crowd lingered; and looked first at the grave and then at
the blind giant who stood over it, as if they felt, by instinct, that
something more ought to come. And something more did come. Amyas drew
himself up to his full height, and waved his hand majestically, as one
about to speak; while the eyes of all men were fastened on him.

Twice he essayed to begin; and twice the words were choked upon his
lips; and then,--

"Good people all, and seamen, among whom I was bred, and to whom I come
home blind this day, to dwell with you till death--Here lieth the flower
and pattern of all bold mariners; the truest of friends, and the most
terrible of foes; unchangeable of purpose, crafty of council, and swift
of execution; in triumph most sober, in failure (as God knows I have
found full many a day) of endurance beyond mortal man. Who first of all
Britons helped to humble the pride of the Spaniard at Rio de la Hacha
and Nombre, and first of all sailed upon those South Seas, which shall
be hereafter, by God's grace, as free to English keels as is the bay
outside. Who having afterwards been purged from his youthful sins by
strange afflictions and torments unspeakable, suffered at the hands of
the Popish enemy, learned therefrom, my masters, to fear God, and to
fear naught else; and having acquitted himself worthily in his place and
calling as a righteous scourge of the Spaniard, and a faithful soldier
of the Lord Jesus Christ, is now exalted to his reward, as Elijah was of
old, in a chariot of fire unto heaven: letting fall, I trust and pray,
upon you who are left behind the mantle of his valor and his godliness,
that so these shores may never be without brave and pious mariners, who
will count their lives as worthless in the cause of their Country, their
Bible, and their Queen. Amen."

And feeling for his companions' hands he walked slowly from the
churchyard, and across the village street, and up the lane to Burrough
gates; while the crowd made way for him in solemn silence, as for an
awful being, shut up alone with all his strength, valor, and fame, in
the dark prison-house of his mysterious doom.

He seemed to know perfectly when they had reached the gates, opened the
lock with his own hands, and went boldly forward along the gravel path,
while Cary and Brimblecombe followed him trembling; for they expected
some violent burst of emotion, either from him or his mother, and the
two good fellows' tender hearts were fluttering like a girl's. Up to
the door he went, as if he had seen it; felt for the entrance, stood
therein, and called quietly, "Mother!"

In a moment his mother was on his bosom.

Neither spoke for awhile. She sobbing inwardly, with tearless eyes, he
standing firm and cheerful, with his great arms clasped around her.

"Mother!" he said at last, "I am come home, you see, because I needs
must come. Will you take me in, and look after this useless carcase? I
shall not be so very troublesome, mother,--shall I?" and he looked down,
and smiled upon her, and kissed her brow.

She answered not a word, but passed her arm gently round his waist, and
led him in.

"Take care of your head, dear child, the doors are low." And they went
in together.

"Will! Jack!" called Amyas, turning round: but the two good fellows had
walked briskly off.

"I'm glad we are away," said Cary; "I should have made a baby of myself
in another minute, watching that angel of a woman. How her face worked
and how she kept it in!"

"Ah, well!" said Jack, "there goes a brave servant of the queen's cut
off before his work was a quarter done. Heigho! I must home now, and see
my old father, and then--"

"And then home with me," said Cary. "You and I never part again! We have
pulled in the same boat too long, Jack; and you must not go spending
your prize-money in riotous living. I must see after you, old Jack
ashore, or we shall have you treating half the town in taverns for a
week to come."

"Oh, Mr. Cary!" said Jack, scandalized.

"Come home with me, and we'll poison the parson, and my father shall
give you the rectory."

"Oh, Mr. Cary!" said Jack.

So the two went off to Clovelly together that very day.

And Amyas was sitting all alone. His mother had gone out for a few
minutes to speak to the seamen who had brought up Amyas's luggage, and
set them down to eat and drink; and Amyas sat in the old bay-window,
where he had sat when he was a little tiny boy, and read "King Arthur,"
and "Fox's Martyrs," and "The Cruelties of the Spaniards." He put out
his hand and felt for them; there they lay side by side, just as they
had lain twenty years before. The window was open; and a cool air
brought in as of old the scents of the four-season roses, and rosemary,
and autumn gilliflowers. And there was a dish of apples on the table: he
knew it by their smell; the very same old apples which he used to gather
when he was a boy. He put out his hand, and took them, and felt them
over, and played with them, just as if the twenty years had never been:
and as he fingered them, the whole of his past life rose up before him,
as in that strange dream which is said to flash across the imagination
of a drowning man; and he saw all the places which he had ever seen, and
heard all the words which had ever been spoken to him--till he came to
that fairy island on the Meta; and he heard the roar of the cataract
once more, and saw the green tops of the palm-trees sleeping in the
sunlight far above the spray, and stept amid the smooth palm-trunks
across the flower-fringed boulders, and leaped down to the gravel beach
beside the pool: and then again rose from the fern-grown rocks the
beautiful vision of Ayacanora--Where was she? He had not thought of her
till now. How he had wronged her! Let be; he had been punished, and the
account was squared. Perhaps she did not care for him any longer. Who
would care for a great blind ox like him, who must be fed and tended
like a baby for the rest of his lazy life? Tut! How long his mother
was away! And he began playing again with his apples, and thought about
nothing but them, and his climbs with Frank in the orchard years ago.

At last one of them slipt through his fingers, and fell on the floor. He
stooped and felt for it: but he could not find it. Vexatious! He turned
hastily to search in another direction, and struck his head sharply
against the table.

Was it the pain, or the little disappointment? or was it the sense of
his blindness brought home to him in that ludicrous commonplace way,
and for that very reason all the more humiliating? or was it the sudden
revulsion of overstrained nerves, produced by that slight shock? Or had
he become indeed a child once more? I know not; but so it was, that he
stamped on the floor with pettishness, and then checking himself, burst
into a violent flood of tears.

A quick rustle passed him; the apple was replaced in his hand, and
Ayacanora's voice sobbed out:

"There! there it is! Do not weep! Oh, do not weep! I cannot bear it!
I will get you all you want! Only let me fetch and carry for you, tend
you, feed you, lead you, like your slave, your dog! Say that I may be
your slave!" and falling on her knees at his feet, she seized both his
hands, and covered them with kisses.

"Yes!" she cried, "I will be your slave! I must be! You cannot help it!
You cannot escape from me now! You cannot go to sea! You cannot turn
your back upon wretched me. I have you safe now! Safe!" and she clutched
his hands triumphantly. "Ah! and what a wretch I am, to rejoice in that!
to taunt him with his blindness! Oh, forgive me! I am but a poor wild
girl--a wild Indian savage, you know: but--but--" and she burst into
tears.

A great spasm shook the body and soul of Amyas Leigh; he sat quite
silent for a minute, and then said solemnly:

"And is this still possible? Then God have mercy upon me a sinner!"

Ayacanora looked up in his face inquiringly: but before she could speak
again, he had bent down, and lifting her as the lion lifts the lamb,
pressed her to his bosom, and covered her face with kisses.

The door opened. There was the rustle of a gown; Ayacanora sprang from
him with a little cry, and stood, half-trembling, half-defiant, as if to
say, "He is mine now; no one dare part him from me!"

"Who is it?" asked Amyas.

"Your mother."

"You see that I am bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, mother,"
said he, with a smile.

He heard her approach. Then a kiss and a sob passed between the women;
and he felt Ayacanora sink once more upon his bosom.

"Amyas, my son," said the silver voice of Mrs. Leigh, low, dreamy, like
the far-off chimes of angels' bells from out the highest heaven, "fear
not to take her to your heart again; for it is your mother who has laid
her there."

"It is true, after all," said Amyas to himself. "What God has joined
together, man cannot put asunder."

      *    *    *    *    *

From that hour Ayacanora's power of song returned to her; and day by
day, year after year, her voice rose up within that happy home, and
soared, as on a skylark's wings, into the highest heaven, bearing with
it the peaceful thoughts of the blind giant back to the Paradises of the
West, in the wake of the heroes who from that time forth sailed out to
colonize another and a vaster England, to the heaven-prospered cry of
Westward-Ho!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Westward Ho!, by Charles Kingsley

