"At any rate, Mr. O'Carroll, I congratulate you. It has prevented
a grievous scandal from being made public, and the large
expenditure entailed by such a case. You have now only to go down
and take possession."

"I shall write to my uncle, and give him a week to clear out, and
to make what explanation he chooses of the change."

Gerald wrote at once to his uncle. It was coldly worded, and
showed unmistakably that he was, in no way, deceived by the
professions in his letter. He told him that he considered it fair
that he should retain the savings he had made, as he had
personally been confirmed in the ownership of Kilkargan, the
Government being ignorant that his brother had left a son. He said
that he thought it would be more pleasant, for both of them, that
they should not meet, and wished, therefore, that he would leave,
before his arrival to take possession.

John O'Carroll at once summoned the tenants, and astonished them
by informing them that, he was glad to say, he was free at last to
lay down the position he had held as owner of Kilkargan. That his
brother James had left a son, whom they all knew as Desmond
Kennedy, but whom he had been obliged to treat with coldness, lest
suspicions should be excited as to his identity. Had this been
known, he would assuredly have been proscribed as the son of a
rebel, and debarred by law from any inheritance. He was delighted
to say that the time had come when he could publicly acknowledge
him, and place him in possession of the estate, as Her Majesty had
granted him a special indemnity against the pains and penalties
incurred by his father's act of rebellion and treason, and had
restored to him his full rights.

A burst of cheering, such as had not been heard in Kilkargan since
James O'Carroll rode out, at the head of a troop raised among his
tenantry, to fight for King James, greeted the announcement; and,
for the first time since that event, John O'Carroll was, for the
moment, popular. Subsequent reflection, and their knowledge of his
character, soon dissipated that feeling; but in their joy at the
announced approaching arrival of their new master, John O'Carroll
rode away, with his followers, without the manifestation of
hostility that would otherwise have attended his departure.

Bonfires blazed all over the barony when Gerald rode in,
accompanied by Mike. The tenants, and a number of the gentry who
had known him when a boy, assembled at the castle to meet him; and
even his father could not have met with a more enthusiastic
welcome than that which was given him.

The next day, Gerald wrote to the Duke of Berwick, telling him
what had taken place, and resigning his commission in the Irish
Brigade.

"I intend," he said, "to abstain from all part in politics.
Although no condition was made, in my pardon for serving abroad
and in the restoration of my estate, I feel that, having accepted
these favours, I must hold myself aloof from all plots against
Queen Anne, though my heart will still be with him whom I hold to
be my lawful sovereign. Unless a large army from France was landed
here, I believe that any attempt at his restoration would only
bring down fresh misery upon Ireland. But, should a force land
that would render success almost a certainty, I should then, with
the great bulk of my countrymen, join it."

In due time he received an answer, approving the course he had
taken.

"I myself," the Duke said, "am under no delusions. With the ten
regiments of the Irish Brigade, twenty thousand French troops, and
arms sufficient to distribute to the whole country, I believe that
Ireland and Scotland might again come under the rule of the
Stuarts; but nothing short of such a force would be of any avail.
So convinced was I of this that, in 1691, after the successful
defence of Limerick, I saw that the cause was for the time lost,
and that further resistance would only prove disastrous to
Ireland. I therefore resigned my command, and went over to France
to serve as a volunteer, and took no part in the war at home.
Therefore, I think that you are fully justified in the course you
have taken. When the present war, which I think is approaching its
end, terminates, and you can again visit France, I trust that I
shall see you; and I am sure that you will receive the heartiest
of welcomes from your comrades in the Brigade."

Gerald followed out strictly the line he had laid down for
himself, and kept aloof from the plots and conspiracies that, for
years, agitated the country, entailing disaster upon all concerned
in them. Mike was installed as his body servant, and majordomo of
his household; and Norah Rooney as housekeeper at the castle.

Three years later, in 1713, the treaty of Utrecht brought the war
to an end. Communications being restored between the two
countries, Gerald wrote to the Baron de Pointdexter, and told him
of the changes which had taken place in his position. He received
a warm letter in reply, urging him to go over and pay him and his
son-in-law a visit.

But Gerald had had enough of travelling, and wrote to say that he
could not leave his estate, as there was much to look after.
Letters were, however, frequently exchanged between them, and
when, three years later, Gerald married the daughter of the Mr.
Kennedy he had visited near Cork, a present of a superb set of
jewels, the joint gift of the baron and Monsieur de la Vallee,
arrived for the bride.

After the conclusion of the peace, some of the Irish regiments
were disbanded, and as the British Government, wiser than before,
offered a free pardon to all men and officers who would return,
many availed themselves of it; and among these was O'Neil, who
delighted Gerald by riding up, one day, to the castle.

"You did not expect to see me again, Kennedy; or, as I hear we
ought to call you, O'Carroll. Not knowing where I should find you,
I took the liberty of writing to Baron de Pointdexter, and he
informed me of your good luck, and your change of name."

"And you have left the French service altogether, O'Neill?"

"Yes, and glad enough I am that I shall be able to end my days at
home."

"And what are you thinking of doing?"

"Anything I can get."

"Well, O'Neil, I have some interest with the lord lieutenant. As I
am no longer regarded as one likely to join in plots, I think
that, were I to ride with you to Dublin after you have been here
for a time; and speak to him for you, as one who had seen the
errors of his ways, and was anxious to live peacefully, he would
procure you some appointment."

O'Neil stayed there for three weeks, and they then rode to Dublin.
The lord lieutenant granted Gerald's request, and gave O'Neil an
appointment which would enable him to live in comfort; knowing
that there is nothing, for keeping a man peaceable, like giving
him something to do; and that an idle man is a dangerous man,
while one who has a comfortable position can be trusted to hold
himself aloof from any business that might imperil his place.

O'Neil thoroughly justified Gerald's recommendation of him, and, a
couple of years after his return, married a young and well-endowed
widow; and, to the end of his life, abstained carefully from
mixing himself up, in any way, in politics.

Gerald saw the failure of Prince Charlie's expedition to Scotland;
and the terrible disasters, that befell all who had taken part in
the movement, showed him the wisdom of the course he had
adopted--of standing aloof from all intrigues in favour of the
descendants of James the Second.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In the Irish Brigade, by G. A. Henty

