I can now describe them. For they knew no bounds. I stood before Rosny
silent and confused, with long-forgotten tears welling up to my eyes,
and one regret only in my heart--that my dear mother had not lived to
see the fond illusions with which I had so often amused her turned to
sober fact. Not then, but afterwards, I remarked that the salary of my
office amounted to the exact sum which I had been in the habit of naming
to her; and I learned that Rosny had himself fixed it on information
given him by Mademoiselle de la Vire.

As my transports grew more moderate, and I found voice to thank my
benefactor, he had still an answer. 'Do not deceive yourself, my
friend,' he said gravely, 'or think this an idle reward. My master
is King of France, but he is a king without a kingdom, and a captain
without money. To-day, to gain his rights, he has parted with half his
powers. Before he win all back there will be blows--blows, my friend.
And to that end I have bought your sword.'

I told him that if no other left its scabbard for the king, mine should
be drawn.

'I believe you,' he answered kindly, laying his hand on my shoulder.
'Not by reason of your words--Heaven knows I have heard vows enough
to-day!--but because I have proved you. And now,' he continued, speaking
in an altered tone and looking at me with a queer smile, 'now I suppose
you are perfectly satisfied? You have nothing more to wish for, my
friend?'

I looked aside in a guilty fashion, not daring to prefer on the top of
all his kindness a further petition. Moreover, His Majesty might have
other views; or on this point Turenne might have proved obstinate. In
a word, there was nothing in what had happened, or on M. de Rosny's
communication, to inform me whether the wish of my heart was to be
gratified or not.

But I should have known that great man better than to suppose that he
was one to promise without performing, or to wound a friend when he
could not salve the hurt. After enjoying my confusion for a time he
burst into a great shout of laughter, and taking me familiarly by the
shoulders, turned me towards the door. 'There, go!' he said. 'Go up the
passage. You will find a door on the right, and a door on the left. You
will know which to open.'

Forbidding me to utter a syllable, he put me out. In the passage, where
I fain would have stood awhile to collect my thoughts, I was affrighted
by sounds which warned me that the king was returning that way. Fearing
to be surprised by him in such a state of perturbation, I hurried to the
end of the passage, where I discovered, as I had been told, two doors.

They were both closed, and there was nothing about either of them to
direct my choice. But M. de Rosny was correct in supposing that I had
not forgotten the advice he had offered me on the day when he gave me
so fine a surprise in his own house--'When you want a good wife, M.
de Marsac, turn to the right!' I remembered the words, and without a
moment's hesitation--for the king and his suite were already entering
the passage--I knocked boldly, and scarcely waiting for an invitation,
went in.

Fanchette was by the door, but stood aside with a grim smile, which I
was at liberty to accept as a welcome or not. Mademoiselle, who had been
seated on the farther side of the table, rose as I entered, and we stood
looking at one another. Doubtless she waited for me to speak first;
while I on my side was so greatly taken aback by the change wrought in
her by the Court dress she was wearing and the air of dignity with which
she wore it, that I stood gasping. I turned coward after all that had
passed between us. This was not the girl I had wooed in the greenwood
by St. Gaultier; nor the pale-faced woman I had lifted to the saddle
a score of times in the journey Paris-wards. The sense of unworthiness
which I had experienced a few minutes before in the crowded antechamber
returned in full force in presence of her grace and beauty, and once
more I stood tongue-tied before her, as I had stood in the lodgings at
Blois. All the later time, all that had passed between us was forgotten.

She, for her part, looked at me wondering at my silence. Her face, which
had grown rosy red at my entrance, turned pale again. Her eyes grew
large with alarm; she began to beat her foot on the floor in a manner I
knew. 'Is anything the matter, sir?' she muttered at last.

'On the contrary, mademoiselle,' I answered hoarsely, looking every way,
and grasping at the first thing I could think of, 'I am just from M. de
Rosny.'

'And he?'

'He has made me Lieutenant-Governor of the Armagnac.'

She curtseyed to me in a wonderful fashion. 'It pleases me to
congratulate you, sir,' she said, in a voice between laughing and
crying. 'It is not more than equal to your deserts.'

I tried to thank her becomingly, feeling at the same time more foolish
than I had ever felt in my life; for I knew that this was neither what I
had come to tell nor she to hear. Yet I could not muster up courage nor
find words to go farther, and stood by the table in a state of miserable
discomposure.

'Is that all, sir?' she said at last, losing patience.

Certainly it was now or never, and I knew it. I made the effort. 'No,
mademoiselle,' I said in a low voice. 'Far from it. But I do not see
here the lady to whom I came to address myself, and whom I have seen
a hundred times in far other garb than yours, wet and weary and
dishevelled, in danger and in flight. Her I have served and loved; and
for her I have lived. I have had no thought for months that has not been
hers, nor care save for her. I and all that I have by the king's bounty
are hers, and I came to lay them at her feet. But I do not see her
here.'

'No, sir?' she answered in a whisper, with her face averted.

'No, mademoiselle.'

With a sudden brightness and quickness which set my heart beating she
turned, and looked at me. 'Indeed!' she said. 'I am sorry for that. It
is a pity your love should be given elsewhere, M. de Marsac--since it is
the king's will that you should marry me.'

'Ah, mademoiselle!' I cried, kneeling before her--for she had come round
the table and stood beside me--'But you?'

'It is my will too, sir,' she answered, smiling through her tears.

* * *

On the following day Mademoiselle de la Vire became my wife; the king's
retreat from Paris, which was rendered necessary by the desertion of
many who were ill-affected to the Huguenots, compelling the instant
performance of the marriage, if we would have it read by M. d'Amours.
This haste notwithstanding, I was enabled by the kindness of M. d'Agen
to make such an appearance, in respect both of servants and equipment,
as became rather my future prospects than my past distresses. It is
true that His Majesty, out of a desire to do nothing which might offend
Turenne, did not honour us with his presence; but Madame Catherine
attended on his behalf, and herself gave me my bride. M. de Sully and M.
Crillon, with the Marquis de Rambouillet and his nephew, and my distant
connection, the Duke de Rohan, who first acknowledged me on that day,
were among those who earned my gratitude by attending me upon the
occasion.

The marriage of M. Francois d'Agen with the widow of my old rival and
opponent did not take place until something more than a year later, a
delay which was less displeasing to me than to the bridegroom, inasmuch
as it left madame at liberty to bear my wife company during my absence
on the campaign of Arques and Ivry. In the latter battle, which added
vastly to the renown of M. de Rosny, who captured the enemy's standard
with his own hand, I had the misfortune to be wounded in the second
of the two charges led by the king; and being attacked by two foot
soldiers, as I lay entangled I must inevitably have perished but for the
aid afforded me by Simon Fleix, who flew to the rescue with the courage
of a veteran. His action was observed by the king, who begged him
from me, and attaching him to his own person in the capacity of clerk,
started him so fairly on the road to fortune that he has since risen
beyond hope or expectation.

The means by which Henry won for a time the support of Turenne (and
incidentally procured his consent to my marriage) are now too notorious
to require explanation. Nevertheless, it was not until the Vicomte's
union a year later with Mademoiselle de la Marck, who brought him the
Duchy of Bouillon, that I thoroughly understood the matter; or the
kindness peculiar to the king, my master, which impelled that great
monarch, in the arrangement of affairs so vast, to remember the
interests of the least of his servants.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Gentleman of France, by Stanley Weyman

