"Extravagant day-dreams," said Moore, with a sigh and smile, "yet
perhaps we may realize some of them. Meantime, the dew is falling. Mrs.
Moore, I shall take you in."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is August. The bells clash out again, not only through Yorkshire, but
through England. From Spain the voice of a trumpet has sounded long; it
now waxes louder and louder; it proclaims Salamanca won. This night is
Briarfield to be illuminated. On this day the Fieldhead tenantry dine
together; the Hollow's Mill workpeople will be assembled for a like
festal purpose; the schools have a grand treat. This morning there were
two marriages solemnized in Briarfield church--Louis Gerard Moore, Esq.,
late of Antwerp, to Shirley, daughter of the late Charles Cave Keeldar,
Esq., of Fieldhead; Robert Gerard Moore, Esq., of Hollow's Mill, to
Caroline, niece of the Rev. Matthewson Helstone, M.A., rector of
Briarfield.

The ceremony, in the first instance, was performed by Mr. Helstone,
Hiram Yorke, Esq., of Briarmains, giving the bride away. In the second
instance, Mr. Hall, vicar of Nunnely, officiated. Amongst the bridal
train the two most noticeable personages were the youthful bridesmen,
Henry Sympson and Martin Yorke.

I suppose Robert Moore's prophecies were, partially at least, fulfilled.
The other day I passed up the Hollow, which tradition says was once
green, and lone, and wild; and there I saw the manufacturer's day-dreams
embodied in substantial stone and brick and ashes--the cinder-black
highway, the cottages, and the cottage gardens; there I saw a mighty
mill, and a chimney ambitious as the tower of Babel. I told my old
housekeeper when I came home where I had been.

"Ay," said she, "this world has queer changes. I can remember the old
mill being built--the very first it was in all the district; and then I
can remember it being pulled down, and going with my lake-lasses
[companions] to see the foundation-stone of the new one laid. The two
Mr. Moores made a great stir about it. They were there, and a deal of
fine folk besides, and both their ladies; very bonny and grand they
looked. But Mrs. Louis was the grandest; she always wore such handsome
dresses. Mrs. Robert was quieter like. Mrs. Louis smiled when she
talked. She had a real, happy, glad, good-natured look; but she had een
that pierced a body through. There is no such ladies nowadays."

"What was the Hollow like then, Martha?"

"Different to what it is now; but I can tell of it clean different
again, when there was neither mill, nor cot, nor hall, except Fieldhead,
within two miles of it. I can tell, one summer evening, fifty years
syne, my mother coming running in just at the edge of dark, almost
fleyed out of her wits, saying she had seen a fairish [fairy] in
Fieldhead Hollow; and that was the last fairish that ever was seen on
this countryside (though they've been heard within these forty years). A
lonesome spot it was, and a bonny spot, full of oak trees and nut trees.
It is altered now."

The story is told. I think I now see the judicious reader putting on his
spectacles to look for the moral. It would be an insult to his sagacity
to offer directions. I only say, God speed him in the quest!


THE END.




ESTABLISHED 1798

[Illustration]

T. NELSON AND SONS

PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS




THE NELSON CLASSICS.

_Uniform with this Volume and Same Price._


=Jack Sheppard.= HARRISON AINSWORTH.


=Masterman Ready.= CAPTAIN MARRYAT.


=Michael Strogoff.= JULES VERNE.


=The Wide Wide World.= ELIZ. WETHERELL.

This famous American novel has for many years been a classic in every
home. It is a masterpiece of the best type of domestic fiction.


=Hereward the Wake.= CHARLES KINGSLEY.

This brilliant romance tells of the last stand of the great English
leader, Hereward, against the advance of the Normans. The scene is
largely laid in the Fen country, and every page is a record of fierce
strife. The fall of Hereward is one of the greatest death scenes in
literature.


=David Copperfield--I.= CHARLES DICKENS.


=David Copperfield--II.= CHARLES DICKENS.

"David Copperfield" is, by general consent, Dickens's masterpiece,
showing, as it does, all his peculiar merits in their highest form. It
is the most autobiographical of his novels, and the one into which he
put most of his philosophy of life.


=Jane Eyre.= CHARLOTTE BRONTE.

"Jane Eyre" is Charlotte Bronte's first and most famous work. It was the
first realistic novel, in the modern sense of the word, in English
literature, and its influence has been beyond reckoning. It ranks as one
of the great novels of the nineteenth century.


=Verdant Green.= CUTHBERT BEDE.

This is the humorous classic of Oxford life. Published more than half a
century ago, its humour is as fresh to-day as ever.


=Pickwick Papers--I.= CHARLES DICKENS.


=Pickwick Papers--II.= CHARLES DICKENS.

Every year sees a new edition of "Pickwick," and the world still asks
for more. It is one of the world's greatest romances of the road, where
adventures fall to those who seek them. It is also a faithful and loving
picture of an older England, from which we have travelled far to-day. We
may become a wiser people, but we shall never again be so humorous.


=Windsor Castle.= HARRISON AINSWORTH.

The romances of Harrison Ainsworth need no advertisement. In this, as in
his "Tower of London" and "Old St. Paul's," he has taken one of
England's great historical sites, and woven around it an appropriate
romance.


=Peg Woffington.= CHARLES READE.

"Peg Woffington" was the first of Charles Reade's romances, and was
founded upon his comedy, "Masks and Faces." The story of the famous
Irish actress who dazzled London in the eighteenth century, and with
whom Garrick was in love, has been made the foundation of a charming
romance.


=Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character.= Dean RAMSAY.

The only book of jests that has ever attained an honourable place in
literature. Its wealth of genuine humour is a perpetual refutation of
the old slander that Scots joke "wi' deeficulty."


=Parables from Nature.= Mrs. GATTY.

This is one of the great children's books of the world. It was a classic
in our grandmothers' time, and possesses that imperishable charm which
makes it as attractive to-day as when it was first written.


=Lavengro.= GEORGE BORROW.

The greatest romance of the road in English literature, telling of all
the byways and humours of that older England which is fast disappearing.


=Little Women.= LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

This delightful book has become a possession of childhood and youth. It
has captured the affections of millions of young people in two
continents, and is certainly the finest piece of work in the whole range
of Miss Alcott's breezy, hopeful, genial, and tender writings.


=Pride and Prejudice.= JANE AUSTEN.

=Sense and Sensibility.= JANE AUSTEN.

Sir Walter Scott was among the earliest to detect the merits of Miss
Austen's work, and of recent years her humour and her keen insight into
human nature have been abundantly recognized, so that to-day she is
probably the most read novelist of her period. In Sir Walter Scott's
phrase she possesses "the exquisite touch which renders ordinary
commonplace things and characters interesting."


=Toilers of the Sea.= VICTOR HUGO.

=The Laughing Man.= VICTOR HUGO.

=Les Miserables--I.= VICTOR HUGO.

=Les Miserables--II.= VICTOR HUGO.


='Ninety-Three.= VICTOR HUGO.

Victor Hugo took the romantic novel as invented by Sir Walter Scott and
gave it a new and philosophic interest. All his great romances have a
purpose. "Les Miserables" exposes the tyranny of human laws; "The
Toilers of the Sea" shows the conflict of man with nature; "The Laughing
Man" expounds the tyranny of the aristocratic ideal as exemplified in
England. But being a great artist as well as a great thinker, he never
turned his romances into pamphlets. Drama is always his aim, and no
novelist has attained more often the supreme dramatic moment.


=The Heir of Redclyffe.= C. M. YONGE.

This is a reprint of Miss Yonge's most famous tale. It has been said of
her that she domesticated the historical romance, which owed its origin
to Sir Walter Scott, and her characters were for long the ideal figures
of most English households.


=Wild Wales.= GEORGE BORROW.

This book was the result of Borrow's wanderings after the publication of
"Lavengro" and "The Romany Rye." He tramped on foot throughout the
country, and the work is a classic of description, both of the scenery
and people.


=The Cloister and the Hearth.= CHARLES READE.

There are many who think this the greatest of all historical novels, and
it is certain that there are few better. It is not a story so much as a
vast and varied transcript of life. It is also a delightful romance, and
Gerard and Margaret are among the immortals of fiction.


=Romola.= GEORGE ELIOT.

This is the only novel of George Eliot's in which the scene is laid
outside her own country. It is a story of Florence during the time of
the Renaissance, a marvellous picture of the intellectual and moral
ferment which the New Learning created. With amazing learning and
insight the author portrays the souls of men and women, and her study of
a weak man and a strong woman has rarely been surpassed in English
literature for dramatic power and moral truth.


=Silas Marner.= GEORGE ELIOT.

This, the shortest and the most exquisite of George Eliot's tales,
represents her great powers at their best. In the picture of the hero
she shows a profound understanding of human nature, and the feelings
which were then moving rural and industrial England.


=The Abbot.= Sir WALTER SCOTT.

One of the Waverley novels which has always been deservedly popular.


=Bride of Lammermoor.= Sir WALTER SCOTT.

The story is a tragedy on the lines of Greek drama, and the ending has
been pronounced by great critics to be the most moving in prose
literature. In the Master of Ravenswood, Scott has drawn perhaps his
greatest tragic figure, and in Caleb Balderstone one of his most
humorous creations.


=The Black Tulip.= ALEXANDRE DUMAS.

This was the last of Dumas' great stories. It is a veritable _tour de
force_, for in it the reader follows with consuming interest the
vicissitudes of a tulip, and the human element in the story is quite
subsidiary. Nevertheless, it contains such strongly-drawn characters as
Cornelius van Baerle, the guardian of the tulip, and Rosa, the jailer's
daughter.


=Tom Cringle's Log.= MICHAEL SCOTT.

A brilliant story of West Indian life by an author who combined abundant
personal experience with keen observation, sprightly temper, and
delightful humour. "Tom Cringle's Log" has been many times reprinted,
and has lost nothing of its popularity and power to please.


=Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.=

Tens of thousands of readers have been led to Shakespeare by the
charmingly told stories which Charles and Mary Lamb, about a hundred
years ago, extracted from the plays of the greatest dramatist of all
time. Though produced by Lamb at the very outset of his literary career,
these stories betray that unique and finished art, that delightful
freshness and rare sympathy, which are the characteristics of his mature
work.


=The Scarlet Letter.= NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

This is one of the most powerful and affecting stories ever conceived.
On its first appearance, in 1850, it immediately leaped high into public
favour, and attained the distinction of an unmistakable classic. The
tragedy of Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale is wrought out in the
midst of an austere Puritan community, which exacts the bitterest
expiation for sin.




THE NELSON CLASSICS.


_Uniform with this Volume and Same Price_.

CONDENSED LIST.

     1. A Tale of Two Cities.
     2. Tom Brown's Schooldays.
     3. The Deerslayer.
     4. Henry Esmond.
     5. Hypatia.
     6. The Mill on the Floss.
     7. Uncle Tom's Cabin.
     8. The Last of the Mohicans.
     9. Adam Bede.
    10. The Old Curiosity Shop.
    11. Oliver Twist.
    12. Kenilworth.
    13. Robinson Crusoe.
    14. The Last Days of Pompeii.
    15. Cloister and the Hearth.
    16. Ivanhoe.
    17. East Lynne.
    18. Cranford.
    19. John Halifax, Gentleman.
    20. The Pathfinder.
    21. Westward Ho!
    22. The Three Musketeers.
    23. The Channings.
    24. The Pilgrim's Progress.
    25. Pride and Prejudice.
    26. Quentin Durward.
    27. Villette.
    28. Hard Times.
    29. Child's History of England.
    30. The Bible in Spain.
    31. Gulliver's Travels.
    32. Sense and Sensibility.
    33. Kate Coventry.
    34. Silas Marner.
    35. Notre Dame.
    36. Old St. Paul's.
    37. Waverley.
    38. 'Ninety-Three.
    39. Eothen.
    40. Toilers of the Sea.
    41. Children of the New Forest.
    42. The Laughing Man.
    43. A Book of Golden Deeds.
    44. Great Expectations.
    45. Guy Mannering.
    46. Modern Painters (Selections)
    47. Les Miserables--I.
    48. Les Miserables--II.
    49. The Monastery.
    50. Romola.
    51. The Vicar of Wakefield.
    52. Emma.
    53. Lavengro.
    54. Emerson's Essays.
    55. The Bride of Lammermoor.
    56. The Abbot.
    57. Tom Cringle's Log.
    58. Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.
    59. The Scarlet Letter.
    60. Old Mortality.
    61. The Romany Rye.
    62. Hans Andersen.
    63. The Black Tulip.
    64. Little Women.
    65. The Talisman.
    66. Scottish Life and Character.
    67. The Woman in White.
    68. Tales of Mystery.
    69. Fair Maid of Perth.
    70. Parables from Nature.
    71. Peg Woffington.
    72. Windsor Castle.
    73. Edmund Burke.
    74. Ingoldsby Legends.
    75. Pickwick Papers.--I.
    76. Pickwick Papers.--II.
    77. Verdant Green.
    78. The Heir of Redclyffe.
    79. Wild Wales.
    80. Two Years Before the Mast.
    81. Jane Eyre.
    82. David Copperfield.--I.
    83. David Copperfield.--II.
    84. Hereward the Wake.
    85. Wide Wide World.
    86. Michael Strogoff.

THOMAS NELSON AND SONS.




    Transcriber's Note:

    Variations in hyphenated words have been retained as
    they appear in the original publication.

    Changes have been made as follows:

    Page 30
    with some inpatience _changed to_
    with some impatience

    Page 48
    very bravely mantained _changed to_
    very bravely maintained

    Page 120
    Sudgen, his staff; and Sudgen arrest him _changed to_
    Sugden, his staff; and Sugden arrest him

    Page 166
    The old atticed _changed to_
    The old latticed

    Page 175
    Let as have _changed to_
    Let us have

    Page 185
    Mrs. Gill, my houskeeper _changed to_
    Mrs. Gill, my housekeeper

    Page 224
    by a downward gave _changed to_
    by a downward gaze

    Page 242
    gently invired him _changed to_
    gently invited him

    Page 245
    a smiling Melancthon _changed to_
    a smiling Melanchthon

    Page 255
    Sentinels of Nunwood _changed to_
    Sentinels of Nunnwood

    Page 260
    only the profiters _changed to_
    only the profiteers

    Page 274
    dark gray irids _changed to_
    dark gray irides

    Page 297
    alight and alow _changed to_
    alight and aglow

    Page 380
    my old accupation _changed to_
    my old occupation

    Page 492
    not without approbrium _changed to_
    not without opprobrium

    Punctuation has been changed as follows:

    Page 119
    Mr Moore, we lived _changed to_
    Mr. Moore, we lived

    Page 145
    stones on the road? _changed to_
    stones on the road.

    Page 393
    "Shirley, my woman _changed to_
    'Shirley, my woman

    Page 540
    _reward_ her!" _changed to_
    _reward_ her!'"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shirley, by Charlotte Bronte

