covered with a small French cap, from whence descended her beautiful
hair in ringlets that waved upon her snowy neck, which dignified the
necklace I had given her; her looks glowed with modesty and love; and
her bosom, through the veil of gauze that shaded it, afforded a prospect
of Elysium! I received this inestimable gift of Providence as became me;
and in a little time the clergyman did his office, my uncle, at his own
earnest request, acting the part of a father to my dear Narcissa, who
trembled very much, and had scarce spirits sufficient to support her
under this great change of situation. Soon as she was mine by the laws
or heaven and earth, I printed a burning kiss upon her lips; my father
embraced her tenderly, my uncle hugged her with great affection, and
I presented her to my friend Banter, who saluted her in a very polite
manner; Miss Williams hung round her neck, and went plentifully; while
Strap fell upon his knees, and begged to kiss his lady's hand, which she
presented with great affability. I shall not pretend to describe my own
feelings at this juncture; let it suffice to say that having supped and
entertained ourselves till ten o'clock, I cautioned my Narcissa against
exposing her health by sitting up too late, and she was prevailed upon
to withdraw with her maid to an apartment destined for us. When she left
the room, her face overspread with a blush that set all my blood in a
state of fermentation, and made every pulse beat with tenfold vigour!
She was so cruel as to let me remain in this condition a full half-hour:
when, no longer able to restrain my impatience, I broke from the
company, burst into her chamber, pushed out her confidante, and locked
the door, and found her--O heaven and earth!--a feast a thousand times
more delicious than my most sanguine hopes presaged! But, let me not
profane the chaste mysteries of Hymen. I was the happiest of men!

In the morning I was awaked by three or four drums, which Banter had
placed under the window; upon which I withdrew the curtain, and enjoyed
the unspeakable satisfaction of contemplating those angelic charms which
were now in my possession! Beauty! which, whether sleeping or awake,
shot forth peculiar graces! The light darting upon my Narcissa's eyes,
she awoke also, and recollecting her situation, hid her blushes in my
bosom. I was distracted with joy! I could not believe the evidence of
my senses, and looked upon all that had happened as the fictions of a
dream! In the meantime my uncle knocked at the door, and bade me turn
out, for I had had a long spell. I rose accordingly, and sent Miss
Williams to her mistress, myself receiving the congratulation of Captain
Bowling, who rallied me in his sea phrase with great success. In less
than an hour, Don Rodrigo led my wife into breakfast, where she received
the compliments of the company on her looks, which, they said, if
possible, were improved by matrimony. As her delicate ears were offended
with none of those indecent ambiguities which are too often spoken on
such occasions, she behaved with dignity, unaffected modesty, and ease;
and, as a testimony of my affection and esteem, I presented her, in
presence of them all, with a deed, by which I settled the whole fortune
I was possessed of on her and her heirs for ever. She accepted it with
a glance of most tender acknowledgment, observed, that she could not be
surprised at anything of this kind I should do, and desired my father to
take the trouble of keeping it, saying, "Next to my own Mr. Random, you
are the person in whom I ought to have the greatest confidence." Charmed
with her prudent and ingenuous manner of proceeding, he took the paper,
and assured her that it should not lose its value while in his custody.

As we had not many visits to give and receive, the little time we stayed
in town was spent in going to public diversions, where I have the vanity
to think Narcissa was seldom eclipsed. One night, in particular, we sent
our footman to keep one of the stage boxes, which we no sooner entered,
than we perceived in the opposite box the squire and his lady, who
seemed not a little surprised at seeing us. I was pleased at this
opportunity of confronting them; the more, because Melinda was robbed
of all her admirers by my wife, who happened that night to outshine her
sister both in beauty and dress. She was piqued at Narcissa's victory,
tossed her head a thousand different ways, flirted her fan, looked at
us with disdain, then whispered to her husband, and broke out into
an affected giggle; but all her arts proved ineffectual, either to
discompose Mrs. Random, or to conceal her own mortification, which at
length forced her away long before the play was done. The news of our
marriage being spread, with many circumstances to our disadvantage, by
the industry of this malignant creature, a certain set of persons fond
of scandal began to inquire into the particulars of my fortune, which
they no sooner understood to be independent, than the tables were
turned, and our acquaintance was courted as much as it had been despised
before: but she had too much dignity of pride to encourage this change
of conduct, especially in her relations, whom she could never be
prevailed upon to see, after the malicious reports they had raised to
her prejudice.






CHAPTER LXIX

My father intends to revisit the Place of his Nativity--we propose to
accompany him--my Uncle renews his will in my favour, determining to go
to sea again--we set out for Scotland--arrive at Edinburgh--purchase
our paternal Estate--proceed to it--halt at the Town where I was
educated--take up my bond to Crab--the Behaviour of Potion and his
Wife, and one of our Female Cousins--our Reception at the Estate--Strap
marries Miss Williams, and is settled by my Father to his own
satisfaction--I am more and more happy.

My father intending to revisit his native country, and pay the tribute
of a few tears at my mother's grave, Narcissa and I resolved to
accompany him in the execution of his pious office, and accordingly
prepared for the journey, in which, however, my uncle would not engage,
being resolved to try his fortune once more at sea. In the meantime he
renewed his will in favour of my wife and me, and deposited it in the
hands of his brother-in-law: while I (that I might not be wanting to
my own interest) summoned the squire to produce his father's will at
Doctors' Commons, and employed a proctor to manage the affair in my
absence.

Everything being thus settled, we took leave of all our friends in
London, and set out for Scotland, Don Rodrigo, Narcissa, Miss Williams,
and I, in the coach, and Strap, with two men in livery, on horseback; as
we made easy stages, my charmer held it out very well, till we arrived
at Edinburgh, where we proposed to rest ourselves some weeks.

Here Don Rodrigo having intelligence that the foxhunter had spoilt his
estate, which was to be exposed to sale by public auction, he determined
to make a purchase of the spot where he was born, and actually bought
all the land that belonged to his father.

In a few days after this bargain was made, we left Edinburgh, in order
to go and take possession; and by the way halted one night in that town
where I was educated. Upon inquiry, I found that Mr. Crab was dead;
whereupon I sent for his executor, paid the sum I owed with interest,
and took up my bond. Mr. Potion and his wife, hearing of my arrival,
had the assurance to come to the inn where we lodged, and send up their
names, with the desire of being permitted to pay their respects to my
father and me: but their sordid behaviour towards me, when I was an
orphan, had made too deep an impression on my mind to be effaced by
this mean mercenary piece of condescension: I therefore rejected their
message with disdain, and bade Strap tell them, that my father and I
desired to have no communication with such low-minded wretches as they
were.

They had not been gone half-an-hour, when a woman, without any ceremony,
opened the door of the room where we sat, and, making towards my father,
accosted him with, "Uncle, your servant--I am glad to see you." This was
no other than one of my female cousins, mentioned in the first part of
my memoirs, to whom Don Rodrigo replied, "Pray, who are you, madam?"
"Oh!" cried she, "my cousin Rory there knows me very well. Don't you
remember me, Rory?" "Yes, madam," said I; "for my own part, I shall
never forget you. Sir, this is one of the young ladies, who (as I have
formerly told you) treated me so humanely in my childhood!" When I
pronounced these words, my father's resentment glowed in his visage,
and he ordered her to be gone, with such a commanding aspect, that
she retired in a fright, muttering curses as she went downstairs. We
afterwards learned that she was married to an ensign, who had already
spent all her fortune; and that her sister had borne a child to her
mother's footman, who is now her husband, and keeps a petty alehouse in
the country.

The fame of our flourishing condition having arrived at this place
before us, we got notice that the magistrates intended next day to
compliment us with the freedom of their town; upon which my father,
considering their complaisance in the right point of view, ordered the
horses to the coach early in the morning.

We proceeded to our estate, which lay about twenty miles from this
place; and, when we came within half-a-league of the house, were met
by a prodigious number of poor tenants, men, women, and children, who
testified their joy by loud acclamations, and accompanied our coach to
the gate. As there is no part of the world in which the peasants are
more attached to their lords than in Scotland, we were almost devoured
by their affections. My father had always been their favourite, and now
that he appeared their master, after having been thought dead so long,
their joy broke out into a thousand extravagances. When we entered the
court yard, we were surrounded by a vast number, who crowded together
so closely to see us that several were in danger of being squeezed to
death; those who were near Don Rodrigo fell upon their knees, and kissed
his hand, or the hem of his garment, praying aloud for long life and
prosperity to him; others approached Narcissa and me in the same manner;
while the rest clapped their hands at a distance, and invoked heaven to
shower its choicest blessings on our heads! In short, the whole scene,
though rude, was so affecting, that the gentle partner of my heart wept
over it, and my father himself could not refrain from dropping a tear.

Having welcomed his daughter and me to his house, he ordered some
bullocks to be killed, and some hogsheads of ale to be brought from the
neighbouring village, to regale these honest people, who had not enjoyed
such a holiday for many years before.

Next day we were visited by the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, most of
them our relations, one of whom brought along my cousin, the foxhunter,
who had stayed at his house since he was obliged to leave his own! My
father was generous enough to receive him kindly, and even promised to
purchase for him a commission in the army, for which he expressed great
thankfulness and joy.

My charming Narcissa was universally admired and loved for her beauty,
affability, and good sense; and so well pleased with the situation of
the place, and the company round, that she has not as yet discovered the
least desire of changing her habitation.

We had not been many days settled, when I prevailed upon my father to
pay a visit to the village where I had been at school. Here we were
received by the principal inhabitants, who entertained us in the church,
where Mr. Syntax the schoolmaster (my tyrant being dead) pronounced a
Latin oration in honour of our family. And none exerted themselves more
than Strap's father and relations, who looked upon the honest valet
as the first gentleman of their race, and honoured his benefactors
accordingly. Having received the homage of this place, we retired,
leaving forty pounds for the benefit of the poor of the parish; and that
very night, Strap being a little elevated with the regard that had been
shown to him, and to me on his account, ventured to tell me, that he had
a sneaking kindness for Miss Williams, and that, if his lady and I would
use our interest in his behalf, he did not doubt that she would listen
to his addresses. Surprised at this proposal, I asked if he knew the
story of that unfortunate young gentlewoman; upon which he replied,
"Yes, yes, I know what you mean--she has been unhappy, I grant you--but
what of that? I am convinced of her reformation; or else you and my good
lady would not treat her with such respect. As for the censure of the
world, I value it not a fig's end--besides, the world knows nothing of
the matter." I commended his philosophy, and interested Narcissa in
his cause; who interceded so effectually, that in a little time Miss
Williams yielded her consent, and they were married at the approbation
of Don Rodrigo, who gave him five hundred pounds to stock a farm, and
made him overseer of his estate. My generous bedfellow gave her maid the
same sum; so that they live in great peace and plenty within half-a-mile
of us, and daily put up prayers for our preservation.

If there be such a thing as true happiness on earth, I enjoy it. The
impetuous transports of my passion are now settled and mellowed into
endearing fondness and tranquillity of love, rooted by that intimate
connection and interchange of hearts which nought but virtuous wedlock
can produce. Fortune seems determined to make ample amends for her
former cruelty, for my proctor writes that, notwithstanding the clause
in my father-in-law's will, on which the squire founds his claim, I
shall certainly recover my wife's fortune, in consequence of a codicil
annexed, which explains that clause, and limits her restriction to the
age of nineteen, after which she was at her own disposal. I would
have set out for London immediately after receiving this piece of
intelligence, but my dear angel has been qualmish of late, and begins to
grow remarkably round in the waist; so that I cannot leave her in such
an interesting situation, which I hope will produce something to crown
my felicity.













End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Roderick Random,
by Tobias Smollett

