seen the white face of her husband.

Accurate tidings could not be obtained, though the whole course of the
vale was full of stories of escapes, conflicts, and captures. Merthyr
learnt positively that some fugitives had passed the cordon. He came
across Wilfrid and Count Karl, who both verified it in the most sanguine
manner. They knew, however, that Major Nagen continued in the mountains.
Riding by a bend of the road, Merthyr beheld a man playing among
children, with one hand and his head down apparently for concealment at
his approach. It proved to be Beppo. The man believed that Count Ammiani
had fled to Switzerland. Barto Rizzo, he said, was in the mountains
still, and Beppo invoked damnation on him, as the author of those lying
proclamations which had ruined Brescia. He had got out of the city later
than the others and was seeking to evade the outposts, that he might
join his master--"that is, my captain, for I have only one master;" he
corrected the slip of his tongue appealingly to Merthyr. His left hand
was being continually plucked at by the children while he talked, and
after Merthyr had dispersed them with a shower of small coin, he showed
the hand, saying, glad of eye, that it had taken a sword-cut intended
for Count Ammiani. Merthyr sent him back to mount the carriage,
enjoining him severely not to speak.

When Carlo and his companions descended from the mountains, they entered
a village where there was an inn recognized by Angelo as the abode of
Jacopo Cruchi. He there revived Carlo's animosity toward Weisspriess
by telling the tale of the passage to Meran, and his good reasons for
determining to keep guard over the Countess Alessandra all the way.
Subsequently Angelo went to Jacopo for food. This he procured, but he
was compelled to leave the man behind, and unpaid. It was dark when he
left the inn; he had some difficulty in evading a flock of whitecoats,
and his retreat from the village was still on the Austrian side.
Somewhat about midnight Merthyr reached the inn, heralding the carriage.
As Jacopo caught sight of Vittoria's face, he fell with his shoulders
straightened against the wall, and cried out loudly that he had betrayed
no one, and mentioned Major Weisspriess by name as having held the point
of his sword at him and extracted nothing better than a wave of the
hand and a lie; in other words, that the fugitives had retired to the
Tyrolese mountains, and that he had shammed ignorance of who they were.
Merthyr read at a glance that Jacopo had the large swallow and calm
digestion for bribes, and getting the fellow alone he laid money in
view, out of which, by doubling the sum to make Jacopo correct his first
statement, and then by threatening to withdraw it altogether, he gained
knowledge of the fact that Angelo Guidascarpi had recently visited the
inn, and had started from it South-eastward, and that Major Weisspriess
was following on his track. He wrote a line of strong entreaty to
Weisspriess, lest that officer should perchance relapse into anger
at the taunts of prisoners abhorring him with the hatred of Carlo and
Angelo. At the same time he gave Beppo a considerable supply of money,
and then sent him off, armed as far as possible to speed Count Ammiani
safe across the borders, if a fugitive; or if a prisoner, to ensure the
best which could be hoped for him from an adversary become generous.
That evening Vittoria lay with her head on Laura's lap, and the pearly
little crescent of her ear in moonlight by the window. So fair and young
and still she looked that Merthyr feared for her, and thought of sending
her back to Countess Ammiani.

Her first question with the lifting of her eyelids was if he had ceased
to trust to her courage.

"No," said Merthyr; "there are bounds to human strength; that is all."

She answered: "There would be to mine--if I had not more than human
strength beside me. I bow my head, dearest; it is that. I feel that I
cannot break down as long as I know what is passing. Does my husband
live?"

"Yes, he lives," said Merthyr; and she gave him her hand, and went to
her bed.

He learnt from Laura that when Beppo mounted the carriage in silence, a
fit of ungovernable wild trembling had come on her, broken at intervals
by a cry that something was concealed. Laura could give no advice;
she looked on Merthyr and Vittoria as two that had an incomprehensible
knowledge of the power of one another's natures, and the fiery creature
remained passive in perplexity of minds as soft an attendant as a
suffering woman could have:

Merthyr did not sleep, and in the morning Vittoria said to him, "You
want to be active, my friend. Go, and we will wait for you here. I know
that I am never deceived by you, and when I see you I know that the
truth speaks and bids me be worthy of it Go up there," she pointed with
shut eyes at the mountains; "leave me to pray for greater strength. I am
among Italians at this inn; and shall spend money here; the poor people
love it." She smiled a little, showing a glimpse of her old charitable
humour.

Merthyr counselled Laura that in case of evil tidings during his absence
she should reject her feminine ideas of expediency, and believe that she
was speaking to a brave soul firmly rooted in the wisdom of heaven.

"Tell her?--she will die," said Laura, shuddering.

"Get tears from her," Merthyr rejoined; "but hide nothing from her for
a single instant; keep her in daylight. For God's sake, keep her in
daylight."

"It's too sharp a task for me." She repeated that she was incapable of
it.

"Ah," said he, "look at your Italy, how she weeps! and she has cause.
She would die in her grief, if she had no faith for what is to come. I
dare say it is not, save in the hearts of one or two, a conscious faith,
but it's real divine strength; and Alessandra Ammiani has it. Do as I
bid you. I return in two days."

Without understanding him, Laura promised that she would do her utmost
to obey, and he left her muttering to herself as if she were schooling
her lips to speak reluctant words. He started for the mountains with
gladdened limbs, taking a guide, who gave his name as Lorenzo, and
talked of having been 'out' in the previous year. "I am a patriot,
signore! and not only in opposition to my beast of a wife, I assure you:
a downright patriot, I mean." Merthyr was tempted to discharge him at
first, but controlled his English antipathy to babblers, and discovered
him to be a serviceable fellow. Toward nightfall they heard shots up
a rock-strewn combe of the lower slopes; desultory shots indicating
rifle-firing at long range. Darkness made them seek shelter in a
pine-hut; starting from which at dawn, Lorenzo ran beating about like a
dog over the place where the shots had sounded on the foregoing day; he
found a stone spotted with blood. Not far from the stone lay a military
glove that bore brown-crimson finger-ends. They were striking off to
a dairy-but for fresh milk, when out of a crevice of rock overhung
by shrubs a man's voice called, and Merthyr climbing up from perch to
perch, saw Marco Sana lying at half length, shot through hand and
leg. From him Merthyr learnt that Carlo and Angelo had fled higher up;
yesterday they had been attacked by coming who tried to lure there to
surrender by coming forward at the head of his men and offering safety,
and "other gabble," said Marco. He offered a fair shot at his heart,
too, while he stood below a rock that Marco pointed at gloomily as a
hope gone for ever; but Carlo would not allow advantage to be taken of
even the treacherous simulation of chivalry, and only permitted firing
after he had returned to his men. "I was hit here and here," said Marco,
touching his wounds, as men can hardly avoid doing when speaking of the
fresh wound. Merthyr got him on his feet, put money in his pocket, and
led him off the big stones painfully. "They give no quarter," Marco
assured him, and reasoned that it must be so, for they had not taken
him prisoner, though they saw him fall, and ran by or in view of him in
pursuit of Carlo. By this Merthyr was convinced that Weisspriess
meant well. He left his guide in charge of Marco to help him into the
Engadine. Greatly to his astonishment, Lorenzo tossed the back of his
hand at the offer of money. "There shall be this difference between me
and my wife," he remarked; "and besides, gracious signore, serving my
countrymen for nothing, that's for love, and the Tedeschi can't punish
me for it, so it's one way of cheating them, the wolves!" Merthyr shook
his hand and said, "Instead of my servant, be my friend;" and Lorenzo
made no feeble mouth, but answered, "Signore, it is much to my honour,"
and so they went different ways.

Left to himself Merthyr set step vigorously upward. Information from
herdsmen told him that he was an hour off the foot of one of the passes.
He begged them to tell any hunted men who might come within hail that a
friend ran seeking them. Farther up, while thinking of the fine nature
of that Lorenzo, and the many men like him who could not by the very
existence of nobility in their bosoms suffer their country to go through
another generation of servitude, his heart bounded immensely, for he
heard a shout and his name, and he beheld two figures on a rock near the
gorge where the mountain opened to its heights. But they were not Carlo
and Angelo. They were Wilfrid and Count Karl, the latter of whom had
discerned him through a telescope. They had good news to revive him,
however: good at least in the main. Nagen had captured Carlo and Angelo,
they believed; but they had left Weisspriess near on Nagen's detachment,
and they furnished sound military reasons to show why, if Weisspriess
favoured the escape, they should not be present. They supposed that they
were not half-a-mile from the scene in the pass where Nagen was being
forcibly deposed from his authority: Merthyr borrowed Count Karl's
glass, and went as they directed him round a bluff of the descending
hills, that faced the vale, much like a blown and beaten sea-cliff.
Wilfrid and Karl were so certain of Count Ammiani's safety, that their
only thought was to get under good cover before nightfall, and
haply into good quarters, where the three proper requirements of the
soldier-meat, wine, and tobacco--might be furnished to them. After an
imperative caution that they should not present themselves before the
Countess Alessandra, Merthyr sped quickly over the broken ground. How
gaily the two young men cheered to him as he hurried on! He met a sort
of pedlar turning the bluntfaced mountain-spur, and this man said, "Yes,
sure enough, prisoners had been taken," and he was not aware of harm
having been done to them; he fancied there was a quarrel between two
captains. His plan being always to avoid the military, he had slunk
round and away from them as fast as might be. An Austrian common
soldier, a good-humoured German, distressed by a fall that had hurt
his knee-cap, sat within the gorge, which was very wide at the mouth.
Merthyr questioned him, and he, while mending one of his gathered
cigar-ends, pointed to a meadow near the beaten track, some distance up
the rocks. Whitecoats stood thick on it. Merthyr lifted his telescope
and perceived an eager air about the men, though they stood ranged in
careless order. He began to mount forthwith, but amazed by a sudden
ringing of shot, he stopped, asking himself in horror whether it could
be an execution. The shots and the noise increased, until the confusion
of a positive mellay reigned above. The fall of the meadow swept to
a bold crag right over the pathway, and with a projection that seen
sideways made a vulture's head and beak of it. There rolled a corpse
down the precipitous wave of green grass on to the crag, where it
lodged, face to the sky; sword dangled from swordknot at one wrist,
heels and arms were in the air, and the body caught midway hung poised
and motionless. The firing deadened. Then Merthyr drawing nearer beneath
the crag, saw one who had life in him slipping down toward the body,
and knew the man for Beppo. Beppo knocked his hands together and groaned
miserably, but flung himself astride the beak of the crag, and took
the body in his arms, sprang down with it, and lay stunned at Merthyr's
feet. Merthyr looked on the face of Carlo Ammiani.




EPILOGUE

No uncontested version of the tragedy of Count Ammiani's death passed
current in Milan during many years. With time it became disconnected
from passion, and took form in a plain narrative. He and Angelo
were captured by Major Nagen, and were, as the soldiers of the force
subsequently let it be known, roughly threatened with what he termed
I 'Brescian short credit.' The appearance of Major Weisspriess and
his claim to the command created a violent discussion between the two
officers. For Nagen, by all military rules, could well contest it. But
Weisspriess had any body of the men of the army under his charm, and
seeing the ascendency he gained with them over an unpopular officer,
he dared the stroke for the charitable object he had in view. Having
established his command, in spite of Nagen's wrathful protests and
menaces, he spoke to the prisoners, telling Carlo that for his wife's
sake he should be spared, and Angelo that he must expect the fate of a
murderer. His address to them was deliberate, and quite courteous: he
expressed himself sorry that a gallant gentleman like Angelo Guidascarpi
should merit a bloody grave, but so it was. At the same time he
entreated Count Ammiani to rely on his determination to save him. Major
Nagen did not stand far removed from them. Carlo turned to him and
repeated the words of Weisspriess; nor could Angelo restrain his
cousin's vehement renunciation of hope and life in doing this. He
accused Weisspriess of a long evasion of a brave man's obligation to
repair an injury, charged him with cowardice, and requested Major Nagen,
as a man of honour, to drag his brother officer to the duel. Nagen then
said that Major Weisspriess was his superior, adding that his gallant
brother officer had only of late objected to vindicate his reputation
with his sword. Stung finally beyond the control of an irritable temper,
Weisspriess walked out of sight of the soldiery with Carlo, to whom, at
a special formal request from Weisspriess, Nagen handed his sword. Again
he begged Count Ammiani to abstain from fighting; yea, to strike him and
disable him, and fly, rather--than provoke the skill of his right hand.
Carlo demanded his cousin's freedom. It was denied to him, and Carlo
claimed his privilege. The witnesses of the duel were Jenna and another
young subaltern: both declared it fair according to the laws of honour,
when their stupefaction on beholding the proud swordsman of the army
stretched lifeless on the brown leaves of the past year left them with
power to speak. Thus did Carlo slay his old enemy who would have served
as his friend. A shout of rescue was heard before Carlo had yielded up
his weapon. Four haggard and desperate men, headed by Barto Rizzo, burst
from an ambush on the guard encircling Angelo. There, with one thought
of saving his doomed cousin and comrade, Carlo rushed, and not one
Italian survived the fight.

An unarmed spectator upon the meadow-borders, Beppo, had but obscure
glimpses of scenes shifting like a sky in advance of hurricane winds.

Merthyr delivered the burden of death to Vittoria. Her soul had crossed
the darkness of the river of death in that quiet agony preceding the
revelation of her Maker's will, and she drew her dead husband to her
bosom and kissed him on the eyes and the forehead, not as one who had
quite gone away from her, but as one who lay upon another shore whither
she would come. The manful friend, ever by her side, saved her by his
absolute trust in her fortitude to bear the burden of the great sorrow
undeceived, and to walk with it to its last resting-place on earth
unobstructed. Clear knowledge of her, the issue of reverent love,
enabled him to read her unequalled strength of nature, and to rely
on her fidelity to her highest mortal duty in a conflict with extreme
despair. She lived through it as her Italy had lived through the hours
which brought her face to face with her dearest in death; and she also
on the day, ten years later, when an Emperor and a King stood beneath
the vault of the grand Duomo, and the organ and a peal of voices
rendered thanks to heaven for liberty, could show the fruit of her
devotion in the dark-eyed boy, Carlo Merthyr Ammiani, standing between
Merthyr and her, with old blind Agostino's hands upon his head. And then
once more, and but for once, her voice was heard in Milan.


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A common age once, when he married her; now she had grown old
     A fortress face; strong and massive, and honourable in ruin
     Agostino was enjoying the smoke of paper cigarettes
     An angry woman will think the worst
     Anguish to think of having bent the knee for nothing
     Art of despising what he coveted
     As the Lord decided, so it would end! "Oh, delicious creed!"
     Be on your guard the next two minutes he gets you alone
     But is there such a thing as happiness
     By our manner of loving we are known
     Compliment of being outwitted by their own offspring
     Conduct is never a straight index where the heart's involved
     Confess no more than is necessary, but do everything you can
     Critical in their first glance at a prima donna
     Deep as a mother's, pure as a virgin's, fiery as a saint's
     Defiance of foes and (what was harder to brave) of friends
     Do I serve my hand? or, Do I serve my heart?
     English antipathy to babblers
     Every church of the city lent its iron tongue to the peal
     Fast growing to be an eccentric by profession
     Foolish trick of thinking for herself
     Forgetfulness is like a closing sea
     Fortitude leaned so much upon the irony
     Good nerve to face the scene which he is certain will be enacted
     Government of brain; not sufficient Insurrection of heart
     Grand air of pitying sadness
     Had taken refuge in their opera-glasses
     Hated tears, considering them a clog to all useful machinery
     He is in the season of faults
     He is inexorable, being the guilty one of the two
     He postponed it to the next minute and the next
     Her singing struck a note of grateful remembered delight
     I always respected her; I never liked her
     I hope I am not too hungry to discriminate
     I know nothing of imagination
     Impossible for us women to comprehend love without folly in man
     In Italy, a husband away, ze friend takes title
     Intentions are really rich possessions
     Ironical fortitude
     It rarely astonishes our ears It illumines our souls
     Italians were like women, and wanted--a real beating
     Longing for love and dependence
     Love of men and women as a toy that I have played with
     Madness that sane men enamoured can be struck by
     Morales, madame, suit ze sun
     Necessary for him to denounce somebody
     Never, never love a married woman
     No intoxication of hot blood to cheer those who sat at home
     No word is more lightly spoken than shame
     Not to be feared more than are the general race of bunglers
     O heaven! of what avail is human effort?
     Obedience oils necessity
     Our life is but a little holding, lent To do a mighty labour
     Pain is a cloak that wraps you about
     Patience is the pestilence
     People who can lose themselves in a ray of fancy at any season
     Profound belief in her partiality for him
     Question with some whether idiots should live
     Rarely exacted obedience, and she was spontaneously obeyed
     She thought that friendship was sweeter than love
     She was sick of personal freedom
     Simple obstinacy of will sustained her
     Speech was a scourge to her sense of hearing
     Taint of the hypocrisy which comes with shame
     The devil trusts nobody
     The divine afflatus of enthusiasm buoyed her no longer
     They take fever for strength, and calmness for submission
     Too weak to resist, to submit to an outrage quietly
     Too well used to defeat to believe readily in victory
     Was born on a hired bed
     Watch, and wait
     We are good friends till we quarrel again
     We can bear to fall; we cannot afford to draw back
     Went into endless invalid's laughter
     Who shrinks from an hour that is suspended in doubt
     Whole body of fanatics combined to precipitate the devotion
     Why should these men take so much killing?
     Will not admit the existence of a virtue in an opposite opinion
     Women and men are in two hostile camps
     You can master pain, but not doubt
     Youth will not believe that stupidity and beauty can go together





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Vittoria, Complete, by George Meredith

