half-light, and so wounding his companion instead of Gaumata, "Strike
boldly, even if you should stab us both." Darius obeyed, and fortunately
only hit the Magian.

Thus died Oropastes, the high-priest, and his brother Gaumata, better
known under the name of the "pseudo" or "pretended Smerdis."

A few weeks after Darius' election to the throne, which the people
said had been marvellously influenced by divine miracles and the
clever cunning of a groom, he celebrated his coronation brilliantly at
Pasargadae, and with still more splendor, his marriage with his beloved
Atossa. The trials of her life had ripened her character, and she proved
a faithful, beloved and respected companion to her husband through
the whole of that active and glorious life, which, as Prexaspes had
foretold, made him worthy of the names by which he was afterwards
known--Darius the Great, and a second Cyrus.

   [Atossa is constantly mentioned as the favorite wife of Darius, and
   be appointed her son Xerxes to be his successor, though he had three
   elder sons by the daughter of Gobryas. Herodotus (VII. 3.) speaks
   with emphasis of the respect and consideration in which Atossa was
   held, and Aeschylus, in his Persians, mentions her in her old age,
   as the much-revered and noble matron.]

As a general he was circumspect and brave, and at the same time
understood so thoroughly how to divide his enormous realm, and to
administer its affairs, that he must be classed with the greatest
organizers of all times and countries. That his feeble successors were
able to keep this Asiatic Colossus of different countries together for
two hundred years after his death, was entirely owing to Darius. He was
liberal of his own, but sparing of his subjects' treasures, and made
truly royal gifts without demanding more than was his due. He introduced
a regular system of taxation, in place of the arbitrary exactions
practised under Cyrus and Cambyses, and never allowed himself to be
led astray in the carrying out of what seemed to him right, either by
difficulties or by the ridicule of the Achaemenidae, who nicknamed
him the "shopkeeper," on account of what seemed, to their exclusively
military tastes, his petty financial measures. It is by no means one of
his smallest merits, that he introduced one system of coinage through
his entire empire, and consequently through half the then known world.

Darius respected the religions and customs of other nations. When the
writing of Cyrus, of the existence of which Cambyses had known nothing,
was found in the archives of Ecbatana, he allowed the Jews to carry on
the building of their temple to Jehovah; he also left the Ionian cities
free to govern their own communities independently. Indeed, he would
hardly have sent his army against Greece, if the Athenians had not
insulted him.

In Egypt he had learnt much; among other things, the art of managing the
exchequer of his kingdom wisely; for this reason he held the Egyptians
in high esteem, and granted them many privileges, amongst others a canal
to connect the Nile with the Red Sea, which was greatly to the advantage
of their commerce.

   [Traces of this canal can be found as early as the days of Setos I;
   his son Rameses II. caused the works to be continued. Under Necho
   they were recommenced, and possibly finished by Darius. In the time
   of the Ptolemies, at all events, the canal was already completed.
   Herod. II. 158. Diod. I. 33. The French, in undertaking to
   reconstruct the Suez canal, have had much to encounter from the
   unfriendly commercial policy of the English and their influence over
   the internal affairs of Egypt, but the unwearied energy and great
   talent of Monsr. de Lesseps and the patriotism of the French nation
   have at last succeeded in bringing their great work to a successful
   close. Whether it will pay is another question. See G. Ebers, Der
   Kanal von Suez. Nordische Revue, October 1864. The maritime canal
   connecting the Mediterranean with the Red Sea has also been
   completed since 1869. We were among those, who attended the
   brilliant inauguration ceremonies, and now willingly recall many of
   the doubts expressed in our work 'Durch Gosen zum Sinai'. The
   number of ships passing through the canal is constantly increasing.]

During the whole of his reign, Darius endeavored to make amends for
the severity with which Cambyses had treated the Egyptians; even in the
later years of his life he delighted to study the treasures of their
wisdom, and no one was allowed to attack either their religion or
customs, as long as he lived. The old high-priest Neithotep enjoyed
the king's favor to the last, and Darius often made use of his wise old
master's astrological knowledge.

The goodness and clemency of their new ruler was fully acknowledged by
the Egyptians; they called him a deity, as they had called their
own kings, and yet, in the last years of his reign, their desire for
independence led them to forget gratitude and to try to shake off his
gentle yoke, which was only oppressive because it had originally been
forced on them.

   [The name of Darius occurs very often on the monuments as Ntariusch.
   It is most frequently found in the inscriptions on the temple in the
   Oasis el-Khargah, recently photographed by G. Rohlfs. The Egypto-
   Persian memorial fragments, bearing inscriptions in the hieroglyphic
   and cuneiform characters are very interesting. Darius' name in
   Egyptian was generally "Ra, the beloved of Ammon." On a porcelain
   vessel in Florence, and in some papyri in Paris and Florence he is
   called by the divine titles of honor given to the Pharaohs.]

Their generous ruler and protector did not live to see the end of this
struggle.

   [The first rebellion in Egypt, which broke out under Aryandes, the
   satrap appointed by Cambyses, was put down by Darius in person. He
   visited Egypt, and promised 100 talents (L22,500.) to any one who
   would find a new Apis. Polyaen. VII. ii. 7. No second outbreak
   took place until 486 B.C. about 4 years before the death of Darius.
   Herod. VI i. Xerxes conquered the rebels two years after his
   accession, and appointed his brother Achaemenes satrap of Egypt.]

It was reserved for Xerxes, the successor and son of Darius and Atossa,
to bring back the inhabitants of the Nile valley to a forced and
therefore insecure obedience.

Darius left a worthy monument of his greatness in the glorious palace
which he built on Mount Rachmed, the ruins of which are the wonder and
admiration of travellers to this day. Six thousand Egyptian workmen,
who had been sent to Asia by Cambyses, took part in the work and also
assisted in building a tomb for Darius and his successors, the rocky and
almost inaccessible chambers of which have defied the ravages of time,
and are now the resort of innumerable wild pigeons.

He caused the history of his deeds to be cut, (in the cuneiform
character and in the Persian, Median and Assyrian languages), on the
polished side of the rock of Bisitun or Behistan, not far from the spot
where he saved Atossa's life. The Persian part of this inscription
can still be deciphered with certainty, and contains an account of the
events related in the last few chapters, very nearly agreeing with our
own and that of Herodotus. The following sentences occur amongst others:
"Thus saith Darius the King: That which I have done, was done by the
grace of Auramazda in every way. I fought nineteen battles after the
rebellion of the kings. By the mercy of Auramazda I conquered them. I
took nine kings captive. One was a Median, Gaumata by name. He lied and
said: 'I am Bardiya (Bartja), the son of Cyrus.' He caused Persia to
rebel."

Some distance lower down, he names the chiefs who helped him to dethrone
the Magi, and in another place the inscription has these words: "Thus
saith the King Darius: That which I have done was done in every way
by the grace of Auramazda. Auramazda helped me, and such other gods as
there be. Auramazda and the other gods gave me help, because I was
not swift to anger, nor a liar, nor a violent ruler, neither I nor my
kinsmen. I have shown favor unto him who helped my brethren, and I have
punished severely him who was my enemy. Thou who shalt be king after me,
be not merciful unto him who is a liar or a rebel, but punish him with a
severe punishment. Thus saith Darius the King: Thou who shalt hereafter
behold this tablet which I have written, or these pictures, destroy them
not, but so long as thou shalt live preserve them, &c."

It now only remains to be told that Zopyrus, the son of Megabyzus,
continued to the last the king's most faithful friend.

A courtier once showed the king a pomegranate, and asked him of what one
gift of fortune he would like so many repetitions, as there were seeds
in that fruit. Without a moment's hesitation Darius answered, "Of my
Zopyrus."--[Plutarch]

The following story will prove that Zopyrus, on his part, well
understood how to return his royal friend's kindness. After the death of
Cambyses, Babylon revolted from the Persian empire. Darius besieged the
city nine months in vain, and was about to raise the siege, when one day
Zopyrus appeared before him bleeding, and deprived of his ears and nose,
and explained that he had mutilated himself thus in order to cheat the
Babylonians, who knew him well, as he had formerly been on intimate
terms with their daughters. He said he wished to tell the haughty
citizens, that Darius had thus disfigured him, and that he had come to
them for help in revenging himself. He thought they would then place
troops at his disposal, with which he intended to impose upon them by
making a few successful sallies at first. His ultimate intention was to
get possession of the keys, and open the Semiramis gate to his friends.

These words, which were spoken in a joking tone, contrasted so sadly
with the mutilated features of his once handsome friend, that Darius
wept, and when at last the almost impregnable fortress was really won by
Zopyrus' stratagem, he exclaimed: "I would give a hundred Babylons, if
my Zopyrus had not thus mutilated himself."

He then appointed his friend lord of the giant city, gave him its entire
revenues, and honored him every year with the rarest presents. In later
days he used to say that, with the exception of Cyrus, who had no equal,
no man had ever performed so generous a deed as Zopyrus.

   [Herod. III. 160. Among other presents Zopyrus received a gold
   hand-mill weighing six talents, the most honorable and distinguished
   gift a Persian monarch could bestow upon a subject. According to
   Ktesias, Megabaezus received this gift from Xerxes.]

Few rulers possessed so many self-sacrificing friends as Darius, because
few understood so well how to be grateful.

When Syloson, the brother of the murdered Polykrates, came to Susa
and reminded the king of his former services, Darius received him as
a friend, placed ships and troops at his service, and helped him to
recover Samos.

The Samians made a desperate resistance, and said, when at last they
were obliged to yield: "Through Syloson we have much room in our land."

Rhodopis lived to hear of the murder of Hipparchus, the tyrant of
Athens, by Harmodius and Aristogiton, and died at last in the arms of
her best friends, Theopompus the Milesian and Kallias the Athenian, firm
in her belief of the high calling of her countrymen.

All Naukratis mourned for her, and Kallias sent a messenger to Susa, to
inform the king and Sappho of her death.

A few months later the satrap of Egypt received the following letter
from the hand of the king:

   "Inasmuch as we ourselves knew and honored Rhodopis, the Greek, who
   has lately died in Naukratis,--inasmuch as her granddaughter, as
   widow of the lawful heir to the Persian throne, enjoys to this day
   the rank and honors of a queen,--and lastly, inasmuch as I have
   lately taken the great-grandchild of the same Rhodopis, Parmys, the
   daughter of Bartja and Sappho, to be my third lawful wife, it seems
   to me just to grant royal honors to the ancestress of two queens. I
   therefore command thee to cause the ashes of Rhodopis, whom we have
   always esteemed as the greatest and rarest among women, to be buried
   in the greatest and rarest of all monuments, namely, in one of the
   Pyramids. The costly urn, which thou wilt receive herewith, is sent
   by Sappho to preserve the ashes of the deceased."

     Given in the new imperial palace at Persepolis.

             DARIUS, son of Hystaspes.

                  King.



     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A kind word hath far more power than an angry one
     A first impression is often a final one
     A noble mind can never swim with the stream
     Abuse not those who have outwitted thee
     Age is inquisitive
     Apis the progeny of a virgin cow and a moonbeam
     Assigned sixty years as the limit of a happy life
     At my age every year must be accepted as an undeserved gift
     Avoid excessive joy as well as complaining grief
     Be not merciful unto him who is a liar or a rebel
     Between two stools a man falls to the ground
     Blessings go as quickly as they come
     Call everything that is beyond your comprehension a miracle
     Cambyses had been spoiled from his earliest infancy
     Canal to connect the Nile with the Red Sea
     Cannot understand how trifles can make me so happy
     Cast off all care; be mindful only of pleasure
     Confess I would rather provoke a lioness than a woman
     Corpse to be torn in pieces by dogs and vultures
     Creed which views life as a short pilgrimage to the grave
     Curiosity is a woman's vice
     Death is so long and life so short
     Devoid of occupation, envy easily becomes hatred
     Did the ancients know anything of love
     Does happiness consist then in possession
     Easy to understand what we like to hear
     Eros mocks all human efforts to resist or confine him
     Eyes are much more eloquent than all the tongues in the world
     Folly to fret over what cannot be undone
     For the errors of the wise the remedy is reparation, not regret
     Go down into the grave before us (Our children)
     Greeks have not the same reverence for truth
     Happiness has nothing to do with our outward circumstances
     Hast thou a wounded heart? touch it seldom
     He who kills a cat is punished (for murder)
     He is the best host, who allows his guests the most freedom
     He who is to govern well must begin by learning to obey
     Human beings hate the man who shows kindness to their enemies
     I cannot... Say rather: I will not
     I was not swift to anger, nor a liar, nor a violent ruler
     In war the fathers live to mourn for their slain sons
     In our country it needs more courage to be a coward
     In this immense temple man seemed a dwarf in his own eyes
     In those days men wept, as well as women
     Inn, was to be found about every eighteen miles
     Introduced a regular system of taxation-Darius
     Know how to honor beauty; and prove it by taking many wives
     Lovers delighted in nature then as now
     Lovers are the most unteachable of pupils
     Misfortune too great for tears
     Mosquito-tower with which nearly every house was provided
     Multitude who, like the gnats, fly towards every thing brilliant
     Natural impulse which moves all old women to favor lovers
     Never so clever as when we have to find excuses for our own sins
     No man was allowed to ask anything of the gods for himself
     Nothing is more dangerous to love, than a comfortable assurance
     Nothing is perfectly certain in this world
     Numbers are the only certain things
     Observe a due proportion in all things
     Olympics--The first was fixed 776 B.C.
     One must enjoy the time while it is here
     Only two remedies for heart-sickness:--hope and patience
     Ordered his feet to be washed and his head anointed
     Papyrus Ebers
     Pilgrimage to the grave, and death as the only true life
     Pious axioms to be repeated by the physician, while compounding
     Remember, a lie and your death are one and the same
     Resistance always brings out a man's best powers
     Robes cut as to leave the right breast uncovered
     Romantic love, as we know it, a result of Christianity
     Rules of life given by one man to another are useless
     Scarcely be able to use so large a sum--Then abuse it
     Sent for a second interpreter
     Sing their libels on women (Greek Philosophers)
     So long as we are able to hope and wish
     Take heed lest pride degenerate into vainglory
     The past belongs to the dead; only fools count upon the future
     The priests are my opponents, my masters
     The gods cast envious glances at the happiness of mortals
     The beautiful past is all he has to live upon
     They praise their butchers more than their benefactors
     Those are not my real friends who tell me I am beautiful
     Time is clever in the healing art
     True host puts an end to the banquet
     Unwise to try to make a man happy by force
     War is a perversion of nature
     We live for life, not for death
     We've talked a good deal of love with our eyes already
     Whatever a man would do himself, he thinks others are capable of
     When love has once taken firm hold of a man in riper years
     Whether the historical romance is ever justifiable
     Wise men hold fast by the ever young present
     Ye play with eternity as if it were but a passing moment
     Young Greek girls pass their sad childhood in close rooms
     Zeus pays no heed to lovers' oaths






End of Project Gutenberg's An Egyptian Princess, Complete, by Georg Ebers

