me, Lady Desmond, though we have been enemies, we have been friends
also."

"Enemies!" said she, "I hope not." And she spoke so softly, so
unlike her usual self, in the tones so suited to a loving, clinging
woman, that though he did not understand it, he was startled at
her tenderness. "I have never felt that you were my enemy, Mr.
Fitzgerald; and certainly I never was an enemy to you."

"Well; we were opposed to each other. I thought that you were robbing
me of all I valued in life; and you, you thought--"

"I thought that Clara's happiness demanded rank and wealth and
position. There; I tell you my sins fairly. You may say that I was
mercenary if you will,--mercenary for her. I thought that I knew what
would be needful for her. Can you be angry with a mother for that?"

"She had given me a promise! But never mind. It is all over now. I
did not come to upbraid you, but to tell you that I now know how it
must be, and that I am going."

"Had you won her, Owen," said the countess, looking intently into his
face, "had you won her, she would not have made you happy."

"As to that it was for me to judge--for me and her. I thought
it would, and was willing to peril all in the trial. And so was
she--willing at one time. But never mind; it is useless to talk of
that."

"Quite useless now."

"I did think--when it was as they said in my power to give him back
his own,--I did think;--but no, it would have been mean to look for
payment. It is all over, and I will say nothing further; not a word.
I am not a girl to harp on such a thing day after day, and to grow
sick with love. I shall be better away. And therefore I am going, and
I have now come to say good-bye, because we were friends in old days,
Lady Desmond."

Friends in old days! They were old days to him, but they were no more
than the other day to her. It was as yet hardly more than two years
since she had first known him, and yet he looked on the acquaintance
as one that had run out its time and required to be ended. She would
so fain have been able to think that the beginning only had as yet
come to them. But there he was, anxious to bid her adieu, and what
was she to say to him?

"Yes, we were friends. You have been my only friend here I think. You
will hardly believe with how much true friendship I have thought of
you when the feud between us--if it was a feud--was at the strongest.
Owen Fitzgerald, I have loved you through it all."

Loved him? She was so handsome as she spoke, so womanly, so graceful,
there was still about her so much of the charm of beauty, that he
could hardly take the word when coming from her mouth as applicable
to ordinary friendship. And yet he did so take it. They had all loved
each other--as friends should love--and now that he was going she
had chosen to say as much. He felt the blood tingle his cheek at the
sound of her words; but he was not vain enough to take it in its
usual sense. "Then we will part as friends," said he--tamely enough.

"Yes, we will part," she said. And as she spoke the blood mantled
deep on her neck and cheek and forehead, and a spirit came out of
her eye, such as never had shone there before in his presence. "Yes,
we will part," and she took up his right hand, and held it closely,
pressed between both her own. "And as we must part I will tell you
all. Owen Fitzgerald, I have loved you with all my heart,--with all
the love that a woman has to give. I have loved you, and have never
loved any other. Stop, stop," for he was going to interrupt her. "You
shall hear me now to the last,--and for the last time. I have loved
you with such love--such love as you perhaps felt for her, but as she
will never feel. But you shall not say, nay you shall not think that
I have been selfish. I would have kept you from her when you were
poor as you are now,--not because I loved you. No; you will never
think that of me. And when I thought that you were rich, and the head
of your family, I did all that I could to bring her back for you. Did
I not, Owen?"

"Yes, I think you did," he muttered between his teeth, hardly knowing
how to speak.

"Indeed, indeed I did so. Others may say that I was selfish for my
child, but you shall not think that I was selfish for myself. I sent
for Patrick, and bade him go to you. I strove as mothers do strive
for their children. I taught myself,--I strove to teach myself to
forget that I had loved you. I swore on my knees that I would love
you only as my son,--as my dear, dear son. Nay, Owen, I did; on my
knees before my God."

He turned away from her to rub the tears from his eyes, and in doing
so he dragged his hand away from her. But she followed him, and again
took it. "You will hear me to the end now," she said; "will you not?
you will not begrudge me that? And then came these other tidings, and
all that scheme was dashed to the ground. It was better so, Owen; you
would not have been happy with the property--"

"I should never have taken it."

"And she, she would have clung closer to him as a poor man than ever
she had done when he was rich. She is her mother's daughter there.
And then--then-- But I need not tell you more. You will know it all
now. If you had become rich, I would have ceased to love you; but I
shall never cease now that you are again poor,--now that you are Owen
of Hap House again, as you sent us word yourself that day."

And then she ceased, and bending down her head bathed his hand with
her tears. Had any one asked him that morning, he would have said
that it was impossible that the Countess of Desmond should weep.
And now the tears were streaming from her eyes as though she were a
broken-hearted girl. And so she was. Her girlhood had been postponed
and marred,--not destroyed and made away with, by the wrinkled earl
with the gloating eyes.

She had said all now, and she stood there, still holding his hand in
hers, but with her head turned from him. It was his turn to speak
now, and how was he to answer her. I know how most men would have
answered;--by the pressure of an arm, by a warm kiss, by a promise
of love, and by a feeling that such love was possible. And then most
men would have gone home, leaving the woman triumphant, and have
repented bitterly as they sat moody over their own fires, with their
wine-bottles before them. But it was not so with Owen Fitzgerald.
His heart was to him a reality. He had loved with all his power and
strength, with all the vigour of his soul,--having chosen to love.
But he would not now be enticed by pity into a bastard feeling,
which would die away when the tenderness of the moment was no longer
present to his eye and touch. His love for Clara had been such that
he could not even say that he loved another.

"Dear Lady Desmond," he began.

"Ah, Owen; we are to part now, part for ever," she said; "speak to me
once in your life as though we were equal friends. Cannot you forget
for one minute that I am Countess of Desmond?"

Mary, Countess of Desmond; such was her name and title. But so little
familiar had he been with the name by which he had never heard her
called, that in his confusion he could not remember it. And had he
done so, he could not have brought himself to use it. "Yes," he said;
"we must part. It is impossible for me to remain here."

"Doubly impossible now," she replied, half reproaching him.

"Yes; doubly impossible now. Is it not better that the truth should
be spoken?"

"Oh, yes. I have spoken it--too plainly."

"And so will I speak it plainly. We cannot control our own hearts,
Lady Desmond. It is, as you say, doubly impossible now. All the love
I have had to give she has had,--and has. Such being so, why should I
stay here? or could you wish that I should do so?"

"I do not wish it." That was true enough. The wish would have been to
wander away with him.

"I must go, and shall start at once. My very things are packed for my
going. I will not be here to have the sound of their marriage bells
jangling in my ears. I will not be pointed at as the man who has been
duped on every side."

"Ah me, that I was a man too,--that I could go away and make for
myself a life!"

"You have Desmond with you."

"No, no. He will go too; of course he will go. He will go, and I
shall be utterly alone. What a fool I am,--what an ass, that by this
time I have not learned to bear it!"

"They will always be near you at Castle Richmond."

"Ah, Owen, how little you understand! Have we been friends while we
lived under the same roof? And now that she is there, do you think
that she will heed me? I tell you that you do not know her. She is
excellent, good, devoted; but cold as ice. She will live among the
poor, and grace his table; and he will have all that he wants. In
twelve months, Owen, she would have turned your heart to a stone."

"It is that already I think," said he. "At any rate, it will be so to
all others. Good-bye, Lady Desmond."

"Good-bye, Owen; and God bless you. My secret will be safe with you."

"Safe! yes, it will be safe." And then, as she put her cheek up to
him, he kissed it and left her.

He had been very stern. She had laid bare to him her whole heart,
and he had answered her love by never a word. He had made no reply
in any shape,--given her no thanks for her heart's treasure. He had
responded to her affection by no tenderness. He had not even said
that this might have been so, had that other not have come to pass.
By no word had he alluded to her confession,--but had regarded her
delusion as monstrous, a thing of which no word was to be spoken.

So at least said the countess to herself, sitting there all alone
where he had left her. "He regards me as old and worn. In his eyes
I am wrinkled and ugly." 'Twas thus that her thoughts expressed
themselves; and then she walked across the room towards the mirror,
but when there she could not look in it: she turned her back upon
it without a glance, and returned to her seat by the window. What
mattered it now? It was her doom to live there alone for the term of
life with which it might still please God to afflict her.

And then looking out from the window her eyes fell upon Owen as he
rode slowly down across the park. His horse was walking very slowly,
and it seemed as though he himself were unconscious of the pace.
As long as he remained in sight she did not take her eyes from his
figure, gazing at him painfully as he grew dimmer and more dim in the
distance. Then at last he turned behind the bushes near the lodge,
and she felt that she was all alone. It was the last that she ever
saw of Owen Fitzgerald.

Unfortunate girl, marred in thy childhood by that wrinkled earl
with the gloating eyes; or marred rather by thine own vanity! Those
flesh-pots of Egypt! Are they not always thus bitter in the eating?




CHAPTER XLIV.

CONCLUSION.


And now my story is told; and were it not for the fashion of the
thing, this last short chapter might be spared. It shall at any rate
be very short.

Were it not that I eschew the fashion of double names for a book,
thinking that no amount of ingenuity in this respect will make a bad
book pass muster, whereas a good book will turn out as such though no
such ingenuity be displayed, I might have called this "A Tale of the
Famine Year in Ireland." At the period of the year to which the story
has brought us--and at which it will leave us--the famine was at its
very worst. People were beginning to believe that there would never
be a bit more to eat in the land, and that the time for hope and
energy was gone. Land was becoming of no value, and the only thing
regarded was a sufficiency of food to keep body and soul together.
Under such circumstances it was difficult to hope.

But energy without hope is impossible, and therefore was there such
an apathy and deadness through the country. It was not that they did
not work who were most concerned to work. The amount of conscientious
work then done was most praiseworthy. But it was done almost without
hope of success, and done chiefly as a matter of conscience. There
was a feeling, which was not often expressed but which seemed to
prevail everywhere, that ginger would not again be hot in the mouth,
and that in very truth the time for cakes and ale in this world was
all over. It was this feeling that made a residence in Ireland at
that period so very sad.

Ah me! how little do we know what is coming to us! Irish cakes and
ale were done and over for this world, we all thought. But in truth
the Irish cakes were only then a-baking, and the Irish ale was being
brewed. I am not sure that these good things are yet quite fit for
the palates of the guest;--not as fit as a little more time will make
them. The cake is still too new,--cakes often are; and the ale is
not sufficiently mellowed. But of this I am sure, that the cakes and
ale are there;--and the ginger, too, very hot in the mouth. Let a
committee of Irish landlords say how the rents are paid now, and what
amount of arrears was due through the country when the famine came
among them. Rents paid to the day: that is the ginger hot in the
mouth which best pleases the palate of a country gentleman.

But if one did in truth write a tale of the famine, after that it
would behove the author to write a tale of the pestilence; and
then another, a tale of the exodus. These three wonderful events,
following each other, were the blessings coming from Omniscience and
Omnipotence by which the black clouds were driven from the Irish
firmament. If one, through it all, could have dared to hope, and have
had from the first that wisdom which has learned to acknowledge that
His mercy endureth for ever! And then the same author going on with
his series would give in his last set,--Ireland in her prosperity.

Of all those who did true good conscientious work at this time, none
exceeded in energy our friend Herbert Fitzgerald after his return to
Castle Richmond. It seemed to him as though some thank-offering were
due from him for all the good things that Providence had showered
upon him, and the best thank-offering that he could give was a
devoted attention to the interest of the poor around him. Mr. Somers
soon resigned to him the chair at those committee meetings at
Berryhill and Gortnaclough, and it was acknowledged that the Castle
Richmond arrangements for soup-kitchens, out-door relief, and
labour-gangs, might be taken as a model for the south of Ireland. Few
other men were able to go to the work with means so ample and with
hands so perfectly free. Mr. Carter even, who by this time had become
cemented in a warm trilateral friendship with Father Barney and the
Rev. Aeneas Townsend, was obliged to own that many a young English
country gentleman might take a lesson from Sir Herbert Fitzgerald in
the duties peculiar to his position.

His marriage did not take place till full six months after the period
to which our story has brought us. Baronets with twelve thousand a
year cannot be married off the hooks, as may be done with ordinary
mortals. Settlements of a grandiose nature were required, and were
duly concocted. Perhaps Mr. Die had something to say to them, so
that the great maxim of the law was brought into play. Perhaps also,
though of this Herbert heard no word, it was thought inexpedient to
hurry matters while any further inquiry was possible in that affair
of the Mollett connection. Mr. Die and Mr. Prendergast were certainly
going about, still drawing all coverts far and near, lest their
fox might not have been fairly run to his last earth. But, as I
have said, no tidings as to this reached Castle Richmond. There, in
Ireland, no man troubled himself further with any doubt upon the
subject; and Sir Herbert took his title and received his rents, by
the hands of Mr. Somers, exactly as though the Molletts, father and
son, had never appeared in those parts.

It was six months before the marriage was celebrated, but during a
considerable part of that time Clara remained a visitor at Castle
Richmond. To Lady Fitzgerald she was now the same as a daughter, and
to Aunt Letty the same as a niece. By the girls she had for months
been regarded as a sister. So she remained in the house of which she
was to be the mistress, learning to know their ways, and ingratiating
herself with those who were to be dependent on her.

"But I had rather stay with you, mamma, if you will allow me," Clara
had said to her mother when the countess was making some arrangement
with her that she should return to Castle Richmond. "I shall be
leaving you altogether so soon now!" And she got up close to her
mother's side caressingly, and would fain have pressed into her arms
and kissed her, and have talked to her of what was coming, as a
daughter loves to talk to a loving mother. But Lady Desmond's heart
was sore and sad and harsh, and she preferred to be alone.

"You will be better at Castle Richmond, my dear: you will be much
happier there, of course. There can be no reason why you should come
again into the gloom of this prison."

"But I should be with you, dearest mamma."

"It is better that you should be with the Fitzgeralds now; and as
for me--I must learn to live alone. Indeed I have learned it, so you
need not mind for me." Clara was rebuffed by the tone rather than the
words, but she still looked up into her mother's face wistfully. "Go,
my dear," said the countess--"I would sooner be alone at present."
And so Clara went. It was hard upon her that even now her mother
would not accept her love.

But Lady Desmond could not be cordial with her daughter. She made
more than one struggle to do so, but always failed. She could,--she
thought that she could, have watched her child's happiness with
contentment had Clara married Owen Fitzgerald--Sir Owen, as he would
then have been. But now she could only remember that Owen was lost to
them both, lost through her child's fault. She did not hate Clara:
nay, she would have made any sacrifice for her daughter's welfare;
but she could not take her lovingly to her bosom. So she shut herself
up alone, in her prison as she called it, and then looked back upon
the errors of her life. It was as well for her to look back as to
look forward, for what joy was there for which she could dare to
hope?

In the days that were coming, however, she did relax something of
her sternness. Clara was of course married from Desmond Court, and
the very necessity of making some preparations for this festivity
was in itself salutary. But indeed it could hardly be called
a festivity,--it was so quiet and sombre. Clara had but two
bridesmaids, and they were Mary and Emmeline Fitzgerald. The
young earl gave away his sister, and Aunt Letty was there, and Mr.
Prendergast, who had come over about the settlements; Mr. Somers
also attended, and the ceremony was performed by our old friend Mr.
Townsend. Beyond these there were no guests at the wedding of Sir
Herbert Fitzgerald.

The young earl was there, and at the last the wedding had been
postponed a week for his coming. He had left Eton at Midsummer in
order that he might travel for a couple of years with Owen Fitzgerald
before he went to Oxford. It had been the lad's own request, and had
been for a while refused by Owen. But Fitzgerald had at last given
way to the earl's love, and they had started together for Norway.

"They want me to be home," he had said one morning to his friend.

"Ah, yes; I suppose so."

"Do you know why?" They had never spoken a word about Clara since
they had left England together, and the earl now dreaded to mention
her name.

"Know why!" replied Owen; "of course I do. It is to give away your
sister. Go home, Desmond, my boy; when you have returned we will talk
about her. I shall bear it better when I know that she is his wife."

And so it was with them. For two years Lord Desmond travelled with
him, and after that Owen Fitzgerald went on upon his wanderings
alone. Many a long year has run by since that, and yet he has never
come back to Hap House. Men of the county Cork now talk of him as one
whom they knew long since. He who took his house as a stranger is
a stranger no longer in the country, and the place that Owen left
vacant has been filled. The hounds of Duhallow would not recognize
his voice, nor would the steed in the stable follow gently at his
heels. But there is yet one left who thinks of him, hoping that she
may yet see him before she dies.



