off to Persia, to forget the hateful existence of Christianity in
that realised ideal. Alas for the facts! The purest monotheism, they
discovered, was perfectly compatible with bigotry and ferocity, luxury
and tyranny, serails and bowstrings, incestuous marriages and corpses
exposed to the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air; and in
reasonable fear for their own necks, the last seven Sages of Greece
returned home weary-hearted, into the Christian Empire from which they
had fled, fully contented with the permission, which the Khozroo had
obtained for them from Justinian, to hold their peace, and die among
decent people. So among decent people they died, leaving behind them, as
their last legacy to mankind, Simplicius's Commentaries on Epictetus's
_Enchiridion_, an essay on the art of egotism, by obeying which,
whosoever list may become as perfect a Pharisee as ever darkened the
earth of God. Peace be to their ashes!.... They are gone to their own
place................

Wulf, too, had gone to his own place, wheresoever that may be. He died
in Spain, full of years and honours, at the court of Adolf and Placidia,
having resigned his sovereignty into the hands of his lawful chieftain,
and having lived long enough to see Goderic and his younger companions
in arms settled with their Alexandrian brides upon the sunny slopes from
which they had expelled the Vandals and the Suevi, to be the ancestors
of 'bluest-blooded' Castilian nobles. Wulf died, as he had lived, a
heathen. Placidia, who loved him well, as she loved all righteous and
noble souls, had succeeded once in persuading him to accept baptism.
Adolf himself acted as one of his sponsors; and the old warrior was
in the act of stepping into the font, when he turned suddenly to the
bishop, and asked where were the souls of his heathen ancestors? 'In
hell,' replied the worthy prelate. Wulf drew back from the font, and
threw his bearskin cloak around him.... 'He would prefer, if Adolf had
no objection, to go to his own people.' [Footnote: A fact.] And so he
died unbaptized, and went to his own place.

Victoria was still alive and busy: but Augustine's warning had come
true-she had found trouble in the flesh. The day of the Lord had come,
and Vandal tyrants were now the masters of the fair corn-lands of
Africa. Her father and brother were lying by the side of Raphael
Aben-Ezra, beneath the ruined walls of Hippo, slain, long years before,
in the vain attempt to deliver their country from the invading swarms.
But they had died the death of heroes: and Victoria was content. And it
was whispered, among the down-trodden Catholics, who clung to her as an
angel of mercy, that she, too, had endured strange misery and disgrace;
that her delicate limbs bore the scars of fearful tortures; that a room
in her house, into which none ever entered but herself, contained a
young boy's grave; and that she passed long nights of prayer upon
the spot, where lay her only child, martyred by the hands of Arian
persecutors. Nay, some of the few who, having dared to face that fearful
storm, had survived its fury, asserted that she herself, amid her own
shame and agony, had cheered the shrinking boy on to his glorious death.
But though she had found trouble in the flesh, her spirit knew none.
Clear-eyed and joyful as when she walked by her father's side on the
field of Ostia, she went to and fro among the victims of Vandal rapine
and persecution, spending upon the maimed, the sick, the ruined, the
small remnants of her former wealth, and winning, by her purity and her
piety, the reverence and favour even of the barbarian conquerors. She
had her work to do, and she did it, and was content; and, in good time,
she also went to her own place.

Abbot Pambo, as well as Arsenius, had been dead several years; the
abbot's place was filled, by his own dying command, by a hermit from the
neighbouring deserts, who had made himself famous for many miles round,
by his extraordinary austerities, his ceaseless prayers, his loving
wisdom, and, it was rumoured, by various cures which could only be
attributed to miraculous powers. While still in the prime of his
manhood, he was dragged, against his own entreaties, from a lofty cranny
of the cliffs to reside over the Laura of Scetis, and ordained a deacon
at the advice of Pambo, by the bishop of the diocese, who, three years
afterwards, took on himself to command him to enter the priesthood. The
elder monks considered it an indignity to be ruled by so young a man:
but the monastery throve and grew rapidly under his government. His
sweetness, patience, and humility, and above all, his marvellous
understanding of the doubts and temptations of his own generation, soon
drew around him all whose sensitiveness or waywardness had made them
unmanageable in the neighbouring monasteries. As to David in the
mountains, so to him, every one who was discontented, and every one
who was oppressed, gathered themselves. The neighbouring abbots were
at first inclined to shrink from him, as one who ate and drank with
publicans and sinners: but they held their peace, when they saw
those whom they had driven out as reprobates labouring peacefully and
cheerfully under Philammon. The elder generation of Scetis, too, saw,
with some horror, the new influx of sinners: but their abbot had but
one answer to their remonstrances--'Those who are whole need not a
physician, but those who are sick.'

Never was the young abbot heard to speak harshly of any human being.
'When thou halt tried in vain for seven years,' he used to say, 'to
convert a sinner, then only wilt thou have a right to suspect him of
being a worse man than thyself.' That there is a seed of good in all
men, a Divine Word and Spirit striving with all men, a gospel and good
news which would turn the hearts of all men, if abbots and priests could
but preach it aright, was his favourite doctrine, and one which he used
to defend, when, at rare intervals, he allowed himself to discuss
any subject from the writings of his favourite theologian, Clement
of Alexandria. Above all, he stopped, by stern rebuke, any attempt to
revile either heretics or heathens. 'On the Catholic Church alone,' he
used to say, 'lies the blame of all heresy and unbelief: for if she were
but for one day that which she ought to be, the world would be converted
before nightfall.' To one class of sins, indeed, he was inexorable--all
but ferocious; to the sins, namely, of religious persons. In proportion
to any man's reputation for orthodoxy and sanctity, Philammon's judgment
of him was stern and pitiless. More than once events proved him to
have been unjust: when he saw himself to be so, none could confess his
mistake more frankly, or humiliate himself for it more bitterly: but
from his rule he never swerved; and the Pharisees of the Nile dreaded
and avoided him, as much as the publicans and sinners loved and followed
him.

One thing only in his conduct gave some handle for scandal, among the
just persons who needed no repentance. It was well known that in his
most solemn devotions, on those long nights of unceasing prayer and
self-discipline, which won him a reputation for superhuman sanctity,
there mingled always with his prayers the names of two women. And, when
some worthy elder, taking courage from his years, dared to hint kindly
to him that such conduct caused some scandal to the weaker brethren,
'It is true,' answered he; 'tell my brethren that I pray nightly for two
women both of them young; both of them beautiful; both of them beloved
by me more than I love my own soul; and tell them, moreover, that one
of the two was a harlot, and the other a heathen.' The old monk laid his
hand on his mouth, and retired.

The remainder of his history it seems better to extract from an
unpublished fragment of the _Hagiologia Nilotica_ of Graidiocolosyrtus
Tabenniticus, the greater part of which valuable work was destroyed at
the taking of Alexandria under Amrou, A. D. 640.

'Now when the said abbot had ruled the monastery of Scetis seven years
with uncommon prudence, resplendent in virtue and in miracles, it befell
that one morning he was late for the Divine office. Whereon a certain
ancient brother, who was also a deacon, being sent to ascertain the
cause of so unwonted a defection, found the holy man extended upon the
floor of his cell, like Balaam in the flesh, though far differing from
him in the spirit, having fallen into a trance, but having his eyes
open. Who, not daring to arouse him, sat by him until the hour of noon,
judging rightly that something from heaven had befallen him. And at that
hour, the saint arising without astonishment, said, "Brother, make ready
for me the divine elements, that I may consecrate them." And he asking
the reason wherefore, the saint replied, "That I may partake thereof
with all my brethren, ere I depart hence. For know assuredly that,
within the seventh day, I shall migrate to the celestial mansions. For
this night stood by me in a dream, those two women, whom I love, and for
whom I pray; the one clothed in a white, the other in a ruby-coloured
garment, and holding each other by the hand; who said to me, 'That life
after death is not such a one as you fancy; come, therefore, and behold
with us what it is like.'" Troubled at which words, the deacon went
forth yet on account not only of holy obedience, but also of the
sanctity of the blessed abbot, did not hesitate to prepare according
to his command the divine elements: which the abbot having consecrated,
distributed among his brethren, reserving only a portion of the most
holy bread and wine; and then, having bestowed on them all the kiss of
peace, he took the paten and chalice in his hands, and went forth from
the monastery towards the desert; whom the whole fraternity followed
weeping, as knowing that they should see his face no more. But he,
having arrived at the foot of a certain mountain, stopped, and blessing
them, commanded them that they should follow him no farther, and
dismissed them with these words: "As ye have been loved, so love. As ye
have been judged, so judge. As ye have been forgiven, so forgive."
And so ascending, was taken away from their eyes. Now they, returning
astonished, watched three days with prayer and fasting: but at last
the eldest brother, being ashamed, like Elisha before the entreaties of
Elijah's disciples, sent two of the young men to seek their master.

'To whom befell a thing noteworthy and full of miracles. For ascending
the same mountain where they had left the abbot, they met with a certain
Moorish people, not averse to the Christianity, who declared that
certain days before a priest had passed by them, bearing a paten and
chalice, and blessing them in silence, proceeded across the desert in
the direction of the cave of the holy Amma.

'And they inquiring who this Amma might be, the Moors answered that
some twenty years ago there had arrived in those mountains a woman more
beautiful than had ever before been seen in that region, dressed in
rich garments; who, after a short sojourn among their tribe, having
distributed among them the jewels which she wore, had embraced the
eremitic life, and sojourned upon the highest peak of a neighbouring
mountain; till, her garments failing her, she became invisible to
mankind, saving to a few women of the tribe, who went up from time to
time to carry her offerings of fruit and meal, and to ask the blessing
of her prayers. To whom she rarely appeared, veiled down to her feet in
black hair of exceeding length and splendour.

'Hearing these things, the two brethren doubted for awhile: but at last,
determining to proceed, arrived at sunset upon the summit of the said
mountain.

'Where, behold a great miracle. For above an open grave, freshly dug in
the sand, a cloud of vultures and obscene birds hovered, whom two lions,
fiercely contending, drove away with their talons, as if from some
sacred deposit therein enshrined. Towards whom the two brethren,
fortifying themselves with the sign of the holy cross, ascended.
Whereupon the lions, as having fulfilled the term of their guardianship,
retired; and left to the brethren a sight which they beheld with
astonishment, and not without tears.

'For in the open grave lay the body of Philammon the abbot: and by his
side, wrapped in his cloak, the corpse of a woman of exceeding beauty,
such as the Moors had described. Whom embracing straitly, as a brother
a sister, and joining his lips to hers, he had rendered up his soul
to God; not without bestowing on her, as it seemed, the most holy
sacrament; for by the grave-side stood the paten and the chalice emptied
of their divine contents.

'Having beheld which things awhile in silence, they considered that
the right understanding of such matters pertained to the judgment seat
above, and was unnecessary to be comprehended by men consecrated to God.
Whereon, filling in the grave with all haste, they returned weeping
to the Laura, and declared to them the strange things which they had
beheld, and whereof I the writer, having collected these facts from
sacrosanct and most trustworthy mouths, can only say that wisdom is
justified of all her children.

'Now, before they returned, one of the brethren searching the cave
wherein the holy woman dwelt, found there neither food, furniture, nor
other matters; saving one bracelet of gold, of large size and strange
workmanship, engraven with foreign characters, which no one could
decipher. The which bracelet, being taken home to the Laura of Scetis,
and there dedicated in the chapel to the memory of the holy Amma, proved
beyond all doubt the sanctity of its former possessor, by the miracles
which its virtue worked; the fame whereof spreading abroad throughout
the whole Thebaid, drew innumerable crowds of suppliants to that holy
relic. But it came to pass, after the Vandalic persecution wherewith
Huneric and Genseric the king devastated Africa, and enriched the
Catholic Church with innumerable martyrs, that certain wandering
barbarians of the Vandalic race, imbued with the Arian pravity, and made
insolent by success, boiled over from the parts of Mauritania into
the Thebaid region. Who plundering and burning all monasteries, and
insulting the consecrated virgins, at last arrived even at the monastery
of Scetis, where they not only, according to their impious custom,
defiled the altar, and carried off the sacred vessels, but also bore
away that most holy relic, the chief glory of the Laura,--namely, the
bracelet of the holy Amma, impiously pretending that it had belonged
to a warrior of their tribe, and thus expounded the writing thereon
engraven--

'For Amalric Amal's Son Smid Troll's Son Made Me.

Wherein whether they spoke truth or not, yet their sacrilege did not
remain unpunished; for attempting to return homeward toward the sea by
way of the Nile, they were set upon while weighed down with wine and
sleep, by the country people, and to a man miserably destroyed. But the
pious folk, restoring the holy gold to its pristine sanctuary, were
not unrewarded: for since that day it grows glorious with ever fresh
miracles--as of blind restored to sight, paralytics to strength,
demoniacs to sanity--to the honour of the orthodox Catholic Church, and
of its ever-blessed saints.' ...............

So be it. Pelagia and Philammon, like the rest, went to their own place;
to the only place where such in such days could find rest; to the desert
and the hermit's cell, and then forward into that fairy land of legend
and miracle, wherein all saintly lives were destined to be enveloped for
many a century thenceforth.

And now, readers, farewell. I have shown you New Foes under an old
face--your own likenesses in toga and tunic, instead of coat and bonnet.
One word before we part. The same devil who tempted these old Egyptians
tempts you. The same God who would have saved these old Egyptians if
they had willed, will save you, if you will. Their sins are yours,
their errors yours, their doom yours, their deliverance yours. There is
nothing new under the sun. The thing which has been, it is that which
shall be. Let him that is without sin among you cast the first stone,
whether at Hypatia or Pelagia, Miriam or Raphael, Cyril or Philammon.

THE END










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hypatia, by Charles Kingsley

