under the category of bad news. Consequently, Bourrienne woke him up at
three o'clock in the morning and translated the despatch. Bonaparte's
first words were as follows:

"Pooh! Bourrienne, you don't understand German."

But Bourrienne repeated the translation word for word. After this
reading the general rose, had everybody waked up, gave his orders, and
then went back to bed and to sleep.

That same day he left Milan and established his headquarters at
Stradella; there he remained until June 12th, left on the 13th, and
marched to the Scrivia through Montebello, where he saw the field
of-battle, still torn and bleeding after Lannes' victory. The traces of
death were everywhere; the church was still overflowing with the dead
and wounded.

"The devil!" said the First Consul to the victor, "you must have made it
pretty hot here."

"So hot, general, that the bones in my division were cracking and
rattling like hail on a skylight."

Desaix joined the First Consul on the 11th of June, while he was still
at Stradella. Released by the capitulation of El-Arish, he had reached
Toulon the 6th of May, the very day on which Bonaparte left Paris. At
the foot of the Mont Saint-Bernard Bonaparte received a letter from him,
asking whether he should march to Paris or rejoin the army.

"Start for Paris, indeed!" exclaimed Bonaparte; "write him to rejoin the
army at headquarters, wherever that may be."

Bourrienne had written, and, as we have seen, Desaix joined the army the
11th of June, at Stradella. The First Consul received him with twofold
joy. In the first place, he regained a man without ambition, an
intelligent officer and a devoted friend. In the second place, Desaix
arrived just in the nick of time to take charge of the division lately
under Boudet, who had been killed. Through a false report, received
through General Gardannes, the First Consul was led to believe that the
enemy refused to give battle and was retiring to Genoa. He sent Desaix
and his division on the road to Novi to cut them off.

The night of the 13th passed tranquilly. In spite of a heavy storm, an
engagement had taken place the preceding evening in which the Austrians
had been defeated. It seemed as though men and nature were wearied
alike, for all was still during the night. Bonaparte was easy in his
mind; there was but one bridge over the Bormida, and he had been assured
that that was down. Pickets were stationed as far as possible along the
Bormida, each with four scouts.

The whole of the night was occupied by the enemy in crossing the river.
At two in the morning two parties of scouts were captured; seven of the
eight men were killed, the eighth made his way back to camp crying: "To
arms!"

A courier was instantly despatched to the First Consul, who was sleeping
at Torre di Galifo. Meanwhile, till orders could be received, the drums
beat to arms all along the line. A man must have shared in such a scene
to understand the effect produced on a sleeping army by the roll of
drums calling to arms at three in the morning. The bravest shuddered.
The troops were sleeping in their clothes; every man sprang up, ran to
the stacked arms, and seized his weapons.

The lines formed on the vast plains of Marengo. The noise of the drums
swept on like a train of lighted powder. In the dim half-light the hasty
movements of the pickets could be seen. When the day broke, the French
troops were stationed as follows:

The division Gardannes and the division Chamberlhac, forming the extreme
advance, were encamped around a little country-place called Petra Bona,
at the angle formed by the highroad from Marengo to Tortona, and the
Bormida, which crosses the road on its way to the Tanaro.

The corps of General Lannes was before the village of San Giuliano, the
place which Bonaparte had pointed out to Roland three months earlier,
telling him that on that spot the fate of the campaign would be decided.

The Consular guard was stationed some five hundred yards or so in the
rear of Lannes.

The cavalry brigade, under General Kellermann, and a few squadrons of
chasseurs and hussars, forming the left, filled up, along the advanced
line, the gap between the divisions of Gardannes and Chamberlhac.

A second brigade, under General Champeaux, filled up the gap on the
right between General Lannes' cavalry.

And finally the twelfth regiment of hussars, and the twenty-first
chasseurs, detached by Murat under the orders of General Rivaud,
occupied the opening of the Valley of Salo and the extreme right of the
position.

These forces amounted to about twenty-five or six thousand men, not
counting the divisions Monnet and Boudet, ten thousand men in all,
commanded by Desaix, and now, as we have said, detached from the main
army to cut off the retreat of the enemy to Genoa. Only, instead of
making that retreat, the enemy were now attacking.

During the day of the 13th of June, General Melas, commander-in-chief of
the Austrian army, having succeeded in reuniting the troops of Generals
Haddich, Kaim and Ott, crossed the Tanaro, and was now encamped before
Alessandria with thirty-six thousand infantry, seven thousand cavalry,
and a numerous well-served and well-horsed artillery.

At four o'clock in the morning the firing began and General Victor
assigned all to their line of battle. At five Bonaparte was awakened
by the sound of cannon. While he was dressing, General Victor's
aide-de-camp rode up to tell him that the enemy had crossed the Bormida
and was attacking all along the line of battle.

The First Consul called for his horse, and, springing upon it, galloped
off toward the spot where the fighting was going on. From the summit of
the hill he could overlook the position of both armies.

The enemy was formed in three columns; that on the left, comprising all
the cavalry and light infantry, was moving toward Castel-Ceriolo by the
Salo road, while the columns of the right and centre, resting upon each
other and comprising the infantry regiments under Generals Haddich, Kaim
and O'Reilly, and the reserve of grenadiers under command of General
Ott, were advancing along the Tortona road and up the Bormida.

The moment they crossed the river the latter columns came in contact
with the troops of General Gardannes, posted, as we have said, at
the farmhouse and the ravine of Petra Bona. It was the noise of the
artillery advancing in this direction that had brought Bonaparte to the
scene of battle. He arrived just as Gardannes' division, crushed under
the fire of that artillery, was beginning to fall back, and General
Victor was sending forward Chamberlhac's division to its support.
Protected by this move, Gardannes' troops retreated in good order, and
covered the village of Marengo.

The situation was critical; all the plans of the commander-in-chief
were overthrown. Instead of attacking, as was his wont, with troops
judiciously massed, he was attacked himself before he could concentrate
his forces. The Austrians, profiting by the sweep of land that lay
before them, ceased to march in columns, and deployed in lines parallel
to those of Gardannes and Chamberlhac--with this difference, that
they were two to the French army's one. The first of these lines was
commanded by General Haddich, the second by General Melas, the third by
General Ott.

At a short distance from the Bormida flows a stream called the
Fontanone, which passes through a deep ravine forming a semicircle round
the village of Marengo, and protecting it. General Victor had already
divined the advantages to be derived from this natural intrenchment, and
he used it to rally the divisions of Gardannes and Chamberlhac.

Bonaparte, approving Victor's arrangements, sent him word to defend
Marengo to the very last extremity. He himself needed time to prepare
his game on this great chess-board inclosed between the Bormida, the
Fontanone, and Marengo.

His first step was to recall Desaix, then marching, as we have said,
to cut the retreat to Genoa. General Bonaparte sent off two or three
aides-de-camp with orders not to stop until they had reached that corps.
Then he waited, seeing clearly that there was nothing to do but to fall
back in as orderly a manner as possible, until he could gather a compact
mass that would enable him, not only to stop the retrograde movement,
but to assume the offensive.

But this waiting was horrible.

Presently the action was renewed along the whole line. The Austrians
had reached one bank of the Fontanone, of which the French occupied
the other. Each was firing on the other from either side of the ravine;
grape-shot flew from side to side within pistol range. Protected by its
terrible artillery, the enemy had only to extend himself a little more
to overwhelm Bonaparte's forces. General Rivaud, of Gardannes' division,
saw the Austrians preparing for this manoeuvre. He marched out from
Marengo, and placed a battalion in the open with orders to die there
rather than retreat, then, while that battalion drew the enemy's fire,
he formed his cavalry in column, came round the flank of the battalion,
fell upon three thousand Austrians advancing to the charge, repulsed
them, threw them into disorder, and, all wounded as he was by a
splintered ball, forced them back behind their own lines. After that
he took up a position to the right of the battalion, which had not
retreated a step.

But during this time Gardannes' division, which had been struggling with
the enemy from early morning, was driven back upon Marengo, followed by
the first Austrian line, which forced Chamberlhac's division to retreat
in like manner. There an aide-de-camp sent by Bonaparte ordered the two
divisions to rally and retake Marengo at any cost.

General Victor reformed them, put himself at their head, forced his way
through the streets, which the Austrians had not had time to barricade,
retook the village, lost it again, took it a third time, and then,
overwhelmed by numbers, lost it for the third time.

It was then eleven o'clock. Desaix, overtaken by Bonaparte's
aide-de-camp, ought at that hour to be on his way to the battle.

Meanwhile, Lannes with his two divisions came to the help of his
struggling comrades. This reinforcement enabled Gardannes and
Chamberlhac to reform their lines parallel to the enemy, who had now
debouched, through Marengo, to the right and also to the left of the
village.

The Austrians were on the point of overwhelming the French.

Lannes, forming his centre with the divisions rallied by Victor,
deployed with his two least exhausted divisions for the purpose of
opposing them to the Austrian wings. The two corps--the one excited
by the prospect of victory, the other refreshed by a long rest--flung
themselves with fury into the fight, which was now renewed along the
whole line.

After struggling an hour, hand to hand, bayonet to bayonet, General
Kaim's corps fell back; General Champeaux, at the head of the first and
eighth regiments of dragoons, charged upon him, increasing his disorder.
General Watrin, with the sixth light infantry and the twenty-second and
fortieth of the line, started in pursuit and drove him nearly a thousand
rods beyond the rivulet. But this movement separated the French from
their own corps; the centre divisions were endangered by the victory on
the right, and Generals Watrin and Champeaux were forced to fall back to
the lines they had left uncovered.

At the same time Kellermann was doing on the left wing what Champeaux
and Watrin had done on the right. Two cavalry charges made an opening
through the enemy's line; but behind that first line was a second. Not
daring to go further forward, because of superior numbers, Kellermann
lost the fruits of that momentary victory.

It was now noon. The French army, which undulated like a flaming serpent
along a front of some three miles, was broken in the centre. The centre,
retreating, abandoned the wings. The wings were therefore forced to
follow the retrograde movement. Kellermann to the left, Watrin to the
right, had given their men the order to fall back. The retreat was made
in squares, under the fire of eighty pieces of artillery which preceded
the main body of the Austrian army. The French ranks shrank visibly; men
were borne to the ambulances by men who did not return.

One division retreated through a field of ripe wheat; a shell burst and
fired the straw, and two or three thousand men were caught in the midst
of a terrible conflagration; cartridge-boxes exploded, and fearful
disorder reigned in the ranks.

It was then that Bonaparte sent forward the Consular guard.

Up they went at a charge, deployed in line of battle, and stopped the
enemy's advance. Meantime the mounted grenadiers dashed forward at a
gallop and overthrew the Austrian cavalry.

Meanwhile the division which had escaped from the conflagration received
fresh cartridges and reformed in line. But this movement had no other
result than to prevent the retreat from becoming a rout.

It was two o'clock.

Bonaparte watched the battle, sitting on the bank of a ditch beside the
highroad to Alessandria. He was alone. His left arm was slipped through
his horse's bridle; with the other he flicked the pebbles in the road
with the tip of his riding-whip. Cannon-balls were plowing the earth
about him. He seemed indifferent to this great drama on which hung all
his hopes. Never had he played so desperate a game--six years of victory
against the crown of France!

Suddenly he roused from his revery. Amid the dreadful roar of cannon and
musketry his ear caught the hoof-beats of a galloping horse. He raised
his head. A rider, dashing along at full speed, his horse covered with
white froth, came from the direction of Novi. When he was within fifty
feet, Bonaparte gave one cry:

"Roland!"

The latter dashed on, crying: "Desaix! Desaix! Desaix!"

Bonaparte opened his arms; Roland sprang from his horse, and flung
himself upon the First Consul's neck.

There was a double joy for Bonaparte in this arrival--that of again
seeing a man whom he knew would be devoted to him unto death, and
because of the news he brought.

"And Desaix?" he questioned.

"Is within three miles; one of your aides met him retracing his steps
toward the cannon."

"Then," said Bonaparte, "he may yet come in time."

"How? In time?"

"Look!"

Roland glanced at the battlefield and grasped the situation in an
instant.

During the few moments that had elapsed while they were conversing,
matters had gone from bad to worse. The first Austrian column, the one
which had marched on Castel-Ceriolo and had not yet been engaged, was
about to fall on the right of the French army. If it broke the line the
retreat would be flight--Desaix would come too late.

"Take my last two regiments of grenadiers," said Bonaparte. "Rally
the Consular guard, and carry it with you to the extreme right--you
understand? in a square, Roland!--and stop that column like a stone
redoubt."

There was not an instant to lose. Roland sprang upon his horse, took the
two regiments of grenadiers, rallied the Consular guard, and dashed to
the right. When he was within fifty feet of General Elsnitz's column, he
called out: "In square! The First Consul is looking at us!"

The square formed. Each man seemed to take root in his place.

General Elsnitz, instead of continuing his way in the movement to
support Generals Melas and Kaim--instead of despising the nine
hundred men who present no cause for fear in the rear of a victorious
army--General Elsnitz paused and turned upon them with fury.

Those nine hundred men were indeed the stone redoubt that General
Bonaparte had ordered them to be. Artillery, musketry, bayonets, all
were turned upon them, but they yielded not an inch.

Bonaparte was watching them with admiration, when, turning in the
direction of Novi, he caught the gleam of Desaix's bayonets. Standing on
a knoll raised above the plain, he could see what was invisible to the
enemy.

He signed to a group of officers who were near him, awaiting orders;
behind stood orderlies holding their horses. The officers advanced.
Bonaparte pointed to the forest of bayonets, now glistening in the
sunlight, and said to one of the officers: "Gallop to those bayonets and
tell them to hasten. As for Desaix, tell him I am waiting for him here."

The officer galloped off. Bonaparte again turned his eyes to the
battlefield. The retreat continued; but Roland and his nine hundred
had stopped General Elsnitz and his column. The stone redoubt was
transformed into a volcano; it was belching fire from all four sides.
Then Bonaparte, addressing three officers, cried out: "One of you to the
centre; the other two to the wings! Say everywhere that the reserves are
at hand, and that we resume the offensive."

The three officers departed like arrows shot from a bow, their ways
parting in direct lines to their different destinations. Bonaparte
watched them for a few moments, and when he turned round he saw a rider
in a general's uniform approaching.

It was Desaix--Desaix, whom he had left in Egypt, and who that very
morning had said, laughing: "The bullets of Europe don't recognize me;
some ill-luck is surely impending over me."

One grasp of the hand was all that these two friends needed to reveal
their hearts.

Then Bonaparte stretched out his arm toward the battlefield.

A single glance told more than all the words in the world.

Twenty thousand men had gone into the fight that morning, and now
scarcely more than ten thousand were left within a radius of six
miles--only nine thousand infantry, one thousand cavalry, and ten cannon
still in condition for use. One quarter of the army was either dead or
wounded, another quarter was employed in removing the wounded; for the
First Consul would not suffer them to be abandoned. All of these forces,
save and excepting Roland and his nine hundred men, were retreating.

The vast space between the Bormida and the ground over which the army
was now retreating was covered with the dead bodies of men and horses,
dismounted cannon and shattered ammunition wagons. Here and there rose
columns of flame and smoke from the burning fields of grain.

Desaix took in these details at a glance.

"What do you think of the battle?" asked Bonaparte.

"I think that this one is lost," answered Desaix; "but as it is only
three o'clock in the afternoon, we have time to gain another."

"Only," said a voice, "we need cannon!"

This voice belonged to Marmont, commanding the artillery.

"True, Marmont; but where are we to get them?"

"I have five pieces still intact from the battlefield; we left five more
at Scrivia, which are just coming up."

"And the eight pieces I have with me," said Desaix.

"Eighteen pieces!" said Marmont; "that is all I need." An aide-de-camp
was sent to hasten the arrival of Desaix's guns. His troops were
advancing rapidly, and were scarcely half a mile from the field of
battle. Their line of approach seemed formed for the purpose at hand; on
the left of the road was a gigantic perpendicular hedge protected by a
bank. The infantry was made to file in a narrow line along it, and it
even hid the cavalry from view.

During this time Marmont had collected his guns and stationed them
in battery on the right front of the army. Suddenly they burst forth,
vomiting a deluge of grapeshot and canister upon the Austrians. For an
instant the enemy wavered.

Bonaparte profited by that instant of hesitation to send forward the
whole front of the French army.

"Comrades!" he cried, "we have made steps enough backward; remember, it
is my custom to sleep on the battlefield!"

At the same moment, and as if in reply to Marmont's cannonade, volleys
of musketry burst forth to the left, taking the Austrians in flank.
It was Desaix and his division, come down upon them at short range and
enfilading the enemy with the fire of his guns.

The whole army knew that this was the reserve, and that it behooved them
to aid this reserve by a supreme effort.

"Forward!" rang from right to left. The drums beat the charge. The
Austrians, who had not seen the reserves, and were marching with their
guns on their shoulders, as if at parade, felt that something strange
was happening within the French lines; they struggled to retain the
victory they now felt to be slipping from their grasp.

But everywhere the French army had resumed the offensive. On all sides
the ominous roll of the charge and the victorious Marseillaise were
heard above the din. Marmont's battery belched fire; Kellermann dashed
forward with his cuirassiers and cut his way through both lines of the
enemy.

Desaix jumped ditches, leaped hedges, and, reaching a little eminence,
turned to see if his division were still following him. There he fell;
but his death, instead of diminishing the ardor of his men, redoubled
it, and they charged with their bayonets upon the column of General
Zach.

At that moment Kellermann, who had broken through both of the enemy's
lines, saw Desaix's division struggling with a compact, immovable mass.
He charged in flank, forced his way into a gap, widened it, broke the
square, quartered it, and in less than fifteen minutes the five thousand
Austrian grenadiers who formed the mass were overthrown, dispersed,
crushed, annihilated. They disappeared like smoke. General Zach and his
staff, all that was left, were taken prisoners.

Then, in turn, the enemy endeavored to make use of his immense cavalry
corps; but the incessant volleys of musketry, the blasting canister, the
terrible bayonets, stopped short the charge. Murat was manoeuvring on
the flank with two light-battery guns and a howitzer, which dealt death
to the foe.

He paused for an instant to succor Roland and his nine hundred men. A
shell from the howitzer fell and burst in the Austrian ranks; it opened
a gulf of flame. Roland sprang into it, a pistol in one hand, his sword
in the other. The whole Consular guard followed him, opening the enemy's
ranks as a wedge opens the trunk of an oak. Onward he dashed, till
he reached an ammunition wagon surrounded by the enemy; then, without
pausing an instant, he thrust the hand holding the pistol through
the opening of the wagon and fired. A frightful explosion followed, a
volcano had burst its crater and annihilated those around it.

General Elsnitz's corps was in full flight; the rest of the Austrian
army swayed, retreated, and broke. The generals tried in vain to stop
the torrent and form up for a retreat. In thirty minutes the French army
had crossed the plain it had defended foot by foot for eight hours.

The enemy did not stop until Marengo was reached. There they made a
vain attempt to reform under fire of the artillery of Carra-Saint-Cyr
(forgotten at Castel-Ceriolo, and not recovered until the day was over);
but the Desaix, Gardannes, and Chamberlhac divisions, coming up at a
run, pursued the flying Austrians through the streets.

Marengo was carried. The enemy retired on Petra Bona, and that too was
taken. Then the Austrians rushed toward the bridge of the Bormida; but
Carra-Saint-Cyr was there before them. The flying multitudes sought the
fords, or plunged into the Bormida under a devastating fire, which did
not slacken before ten that night.

The remains of the Austrian army regained their camp at Alessandria. The
French army bivouacked near the bridge. The day had cost the Austrian
army four thousand five hundred men killed, six thousand wounded, five
thousand prisoners, besides twelve flags and thirty cannon.

Never did fortune show herself under two such opposite aspects as
on that day. At two in the afternoon, the day spelt defeat and its
disastrous consequences to Bonaparte; at five, it was Italy reconquered
and the throne of France in prospect.

That night the First Consul wrote the following letter to Madame de
Montrevel:

  MADAME--I have to-day won my greatest victory; but
  it has cost me the two halves of my heart, Desaix and
  Roland.

  Do not grieve, madame; your son did not care to live,
  and he could not have died more gloriously.

  BONAPARTE.

Many futile efforts were made to recover the body of the young
aide-de-camp: like Romulus, he had vanished in a whirlwind.

None ever knew why he had pursued death with such eager longing.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Companions of Jehu, by Alexandre Dumas, pere

