Coast. "A History of Travel in America," by Seymour Dunbar, illustrated
from old woodcuts and engravings. 4 volumes.

An interesting book for children who wish to understand the problems and
difficulties their grandfathers had in the conquest of the West. This is
a standard book upon the subject of early travel, but is so readable as
to be of interest to older children.

"The Golden Book of the Dutch Navigators," by Hendrik Willem van Loon.
Fully illustrated from old prints.


The World's Progress in Invention--Art--Music.

"Gabriel and the Hour Book," by Evaleen Stein.

How a boy learned from the monks how to grind and mix the colours for
illuminating the beautiful hand-printed books of the time and how he
himself made books that are now treasured in the museums of France and
England. "Historic Inventions," by Rupert S. Holland.

Stories of the invention of printing, the steam-engine, the
spinning-jenny, the safety-lamp, the sewing machine, electric light, and
other wonders of mechanism. "A History of Everyday Things in England,"
written and illustrated by Marjorie and C. V. B. Quennell. 2 Volumes.

A most fascinating book, profusely illustrated in black and white and
in colour, giving a vivid picture of life in England from 1066-1799. It
tells of wars and of home-life, of amusements and occupations, of art
and literature, of science and invention. A book to be owned by every
boy and girl. "First Steps in the Enjoyment of Pictures," by Maude I. G.
Oliver.

A book designed to help children in their appreciation of art by
giving them technical knowledge of the media, the draughtsmanship, the
composition and the technique of well-known American pictures. "Knights
of Art," by Amy Steedman.

Stories of Italian Painters. Attractively illustrated in colour from old
masters. "Masters of Music," by Anna Alice Chapin. "Story Lives of Men
of Science," by F. J. Rowbotham. "All About Treasures of the Earth," by
Frederick A. Talbot.

A book that tells many interesting things about coal, salt, iron, rare
metals and precious stones. "The Boys' Book of New Inventions," by Harry
E. Maule.

An account of the machines and mechancial{sic} processes that are making
the history of our time more dramatic than that of any other age since
the world began. "Masters of Space," by Walter Kellogg Towers.

Stories of the wonders of telegraphing through the air and beneath
the sea with signals, and of speaking across continents. "All About
Railways," by F. S. Hartnell. "The Man-of-War, What She Has Done and
What She Is Doing," by Commander E. Hamilton Currey.

True stories about galleys and pirate ships, about the Spanish Main and
famous frigates, and about slave-hunting expeditions in the days of old.


The Democracy of To-Day.

"The Land of Fair Play," by Geoffrey Parsons.

"This book aims to make clear the great, unseen services that America
renders each of us, and the active devotion each of us must yield in
return for America to endure." An excellent book on our government for
boys and girls. "The American Idea as Expounded by American Statesmen,"
compiled by Joseph B. Gilder.

A good collection, including The Declaration of Independence, The
Constitution of the United States, the Monroe Doctrine, and the famous
speeches of Washington, Lincoln, Webster and Roosevelt. "The Making of
an American," by Jacob A. Riis.

The true story of a Danish boy who became one of America's finest
citizens. "The Promised Land," by Mary Antin.

A true story about a little immigrant. "Before we came, the New World
knew not the Old; but since we have begun to come, the Young World has
taken the Old by the hand, and the two are learning to march side by
side, seeking a common destiny."


Illustrated Histories in French.

(The colourful and graphic pictures make these histories beloved by
all children whether they read the text or not.) "Voyages et Glorieuses
Decouvertes des Grands Navigateurs et Explorateurs Francais, illustre
par Edy Segrand." "Collection d'Albums Historiques." Louis XI, texte de
Georges Montorgueil, aquarelles de Job. Francois I, texte de G. Gustave
Toudouze, aquarelles de Job. Henri IV, texte de Georges Montorgueil,
aquarelles de H. Yogel. Richelieu, texte de Th. Cahu, aquarelles de
Maurice Leloir. Le Roy Soleil, texte de Gustave Toudouze, aquarelles de
Mauriae Leloir. Bonaparte, texte de Georges Montorgueil, aquarelles de
Job. "Fabliaux et Contes du Moyen-Age"; illustrations de A. Robida

INDEX {Not included}






End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Mankind, by Hendrik van Loon

