England, in an account of an extraordinary cure of the king's evil.

'Given in a letter from Crewkhorn, in Somerset, from the minister of the
parish and many others.

'We, whose names are underwritten, do certify the miraculous cure of
a girl of this town, about twenty, by name Elizabeth Parcet, a poor
widow's daughter, who hath languished under sad affliction from that
distemper of the king's evil termed the joint evil, being said to be
the worst evil. For about ten or twelve years' time she had in her right
hand four running wounds, one on the inside, three on the back of her
hand, as well as two more in the same arm, one above her hand-wrist,
the other above the bending of her arm. She had betwixt her arm-pits a
swollen bunch, which the doctors said fed those six running wounds. She
had the same distemper also on her left eye, so she was almost blind.
Her mother, despairing of preserving her sight, and being not of ability
to send her to London to be touched by the king, being miserably poor,
having many poor children, and this girl not being able to work, her
mother, desirous to have her daughter cured, sent to the chirurgeons for
help, who tampered with it for some time, but could do no good. She
went likewise ten or eleven miles to a seventh son, but all in vain. No
visible hopes remained, and she expected nothing but the grave.

'But now, in this the girl's great extremity, God, the great physician,
dictates to her, then languishing in her miserable, hopeless condition,
what course to take and what to do for a cure, which was to go and touch
the Duke of Monmouth. The girl told her mother that, if she could
but touch the Duke she would be well. The mother reproved her for her
foolish conceit, but the girl did often persuade her mother to go to
Lackington to the Duke, who then lay with Mr. Speaks. "Certainly," said
she, "I should be well if I could touch him." The mother slighted these
pressing requests, but the more she slighted and reproved, the more
earnest the girl was for it. A few days after, the girl having noticed
that Sir John Sydenham intended to treat the Duke at White Lodge in
Henton Park, this girl with many of her neighbours went to the said
park. She being there timely waited the Duke's coming. When first she
observed the Duke she pressed in among a crowd of people and caught
him by the hand, his glove being on, and she likewise having a glove to
cover her wounds. She not being herewith satisfied at the first attempt
of touching his glove only, but her mind was she must touch some part
of his bare skin, she, weighing his coming forth, intended a second
attempt. The poor girl, thus between hope and fear, waited his motion.
On a sudden there was news of the Duke's coming on, which she to be
prepared rent off her glove, that was clung to the sores, in such haste
that she broke her glove, and brought away not only the sores but the
skin. The Duke's glove, as Providence would have it, the upper part hung
down, so that his hand-wrist was bare. She pressed on, and caught him
by the bare hand-wrist with her running hand, crying, "God bless your
highness!" and the Duke said "God bless you!" The girl, not a little
transported at her good success, came and assured her friends that she
would now be well. She came home to her mother in great joy, and told
her that she had touched the Duke's hand. The mother, hearing what she
had done, reproved her sharply for her boldness, asked how she durst
do such a thing, and threatened to beat her for it. She cried out, "Oh,
mother, I shall be well again, and healed of my wounds!" And as God
Almighty would have it, to the wonder and admiration of all, the six
wounds were speedily dried up, the eye became perfectly well, and the
girl was in good health. All which has been discovered to us by the
mother and daughter, and by neighbours that know her.

'Henry Clark, minister; Captain James Bale, &c &c. Whoever doubts the
truth of this relation may see the original under the hands of the
persons mentioned at the Amsterdam Coffee House, Bartholomew Lane, Royal
Exchange.'

In spite of the uncouth verbiage of the old narrative, there is a touch
of human pathos about it which makes it worthy of reproduction.


Note H.--Monmouth's Contention of Legitimacy.

Sir Patrick Hume, relating a talk with Monmouth before his expedition,
says: 'I urged if he considered himself as lawful son of King Charles,
late deceased. He said he did. I asked him if he were able to make out
and prove the marriage of his mother to King Charles, and whether he
intended to lay claim to the crown. He answered that he had been able
lately to prove the marriage, and if some persons are not lately dead,
of which he would inform himself, he would yet be able to prove it.
As for his claiming the crown, he intended not to do it unless it were
advised to be done by those who should concern themselves and join for
the delivery of the nations.'

It may be remarked that in Monmouth's commission to be general, dated
April 1668, he is styled 'our most entirely beloved and natural son.'
Again, in a commission for the government of Hull, April 1673, he is
'our well-beloved natural son.'


Note I.--Dragooners and Chargers.

The dragoons, being really mounted infantry, were provided with very
inferior animals to the real cavalry. From a letter of Cromwell's
('Squire Correspondence,' April 3, 1643), it will be seen that a
dragooner was worth twenty pieces, while a charger could not be obtained
under sixty.

Note J.--Battle of Sedgemoor.

A curious little sidelight upon the battle is afforded by the two
following letters exhibited to the Royal Archaeological Institute by the
Rev. C. W. Bingham.

'To Mrs. Chaffin at Chettle House.'

'Monday, about ye forenoon, July 6, 1685.'

'My dearest creature,--This morning about one o'clock the rebbells fell
upon us whilest we were in our tents in King's Sedgemoor, with their
whole army.... We have killed and taken at least 1000 of them. They are
fled into Bridgewater. It is said that we have taken all their cannon,
but sure it is that most are, if all be not. A coat with stars on 't is
taken. ''Tis run through the back. By some 'tis thought that the Duke
rebbell had it on and is killed, but most doe think that a servant wore
it. I wish he were called, that the wars may be ended. It's thought
he'll never be able to make his men fight again. I thank God I am very
well without the least hurt, soe are our Dorsetshire friends. Prythee
let Biddy know this by the first opportunity. I am thyne onely deare,
TOSSEY.'

BRIDGEWATER: July 7, 1685.

'We have totally routed the enemies of God and the King, and can't hear
of fifty men together of the whole rebel army. We pick them up every
houre in cornfields and ditches. Williams, the late Duke's valet de
chambre, is taken, who gives a very ingenious account of the whole
affair, which is too long to write. The last word that he said to him
was at the time when his army fled, that he was undone and must shift
for himself. We think to march with the General this day to Wells, on
his way homeward. At present he is 3 miles off at the camp, soe I can't
certainly tell whether he intends for Wells. I shall be home certainly
on Saturday at farthest. I believe my deare Nan would for 500 pounds
that her Tossey had served the King to the end of the war.

I am thyne, my deare childe, for ever.'


Note K.--Lord Grey and the Horse at Sedgemoor.

It is only fair to state that Ferguson is held by many to have been
as doughty a soldier as he was zealous in religion. His own account of
Sedgemoor is interesting, as showing what was thought by those who were
actually engaged on the causes of their failure.

'Now besides these two troops, whose officers though they had no great
skill yet had courage enough to have done something honourably, had they
not for want of a guide met with the aforesaid obstruction, there was
no one of all the rest of our troops that ever advanced to charge or
approached as near to the enemy as to give or receive a wound. Mr.
Hacker, one of our captains, came no sooner within view of their camp
than he villainously fired a pistol to give them notice of our approach,
and then forsook his charge and rode oft with all the speed he could, to
take the benefit of a proclamation emitted by the King, offering pardon
to all such as should return home within such a time. And this he
pleaded at his tryal, but was answered by Jeffreys "that he above all
other men deserved to be hanged, and that for his treachery to Monmouth
as well as his treason to the King." And though no other of our officers
acted so villainously, yet they were useless and unserviceable, as never
once attempting to charge, nor so much as keeping their men in a body.
And I dare affirm that if our horse had never fired a pistol, but only
stood in a posture to have given jealousy and apprehension to the enemy,
our foot alone would have carried the day and been triumphant. But our
horse standing scattered and disunited, and flying upon every approach
of a squadron of theirs, commanded by Oglethorpe, gave that body of
their cavalry an advantage, after they had hovered up and down in the
field without thinking it necessary to attack those whom their own fears
had dispersed, to fall in at last in the rear of our battalions, and to
wrest that victory out of their hands which they were grasping at, and
stood almost possessed of. Nor was that party of their horse above
three hundred at most, whereas we had more than enough had they had any
courage, and been commanded by a gallant man, to have attacked them
with ease both in front and flank. These things I can declare with
more certainty, because I was a doleful spectator of them; for having
contrary to my custom left attending upon the Duke, who advanced with
the foot, I betook myself to the horse, because the first of that
morning's action was expected from them, which was to break in and
disorder the enemy's camp. Against the time that our battalions should
come up, I endeavoured whatsoever I was capable of performing, for I
not only struck at several troopers who had forsaken their station, but
upbraided divers of the captains for being wanting in their duty. But I
spoke with great warmth to my Lord Grey, and conjured him to charge, and
not suffer the victory, which our foot had in a manner taken hold of,
to be ravished from us. But instead of hearkening, he not only as an
unworthy man and cowardly poltroon deserted that part of the field and
forsook his command, but rode with the utmost speed to the Duke, telling
him that all was lost and it was more than time to shift for himself.
Wherebye, as an addition to all the mischief he had been the occasion
of before, he drew the easy and unfortunate gentleman to leave the
battalions while they were courageously disputing on which side the
victory should fall. And this fell most unhappily out, while a certain
person was endeavouring to find out the Duke to have begged of him to
come and charge at the head of his own troops. However, this I dare
affirm, that if the Duke had been but master of two hundred horse,
well mounted, completely armed, personally valiant, and commanded
by experienced officers, they would have been victorious. This is
acknowledged by our enemies, who have often confessed they were ready
to fly through the impressions made upon them by our foot, and must have
been beaten had our horse done their part, and not tamely looked on
till their cavalry retrieved the day by falling into the rear of our
battalions. Nor was the fault in the private men, who had courage
to have followed their leaders, but it was in those who led them,
particularly my Lord Grey, in whom, if cowardice may be called
treachery, we may safely charge him with betraying our cause.'

Extract from MS. of Dr. Ferguson, quoted in 'Ferguson the Plotter,' an
interesting work by his immediate descendant, an advocate of Edinburgh.


Note L.--Monmouth's Attitude after Capture.

The following letter, written by Monmouth to the Queen from the Tower,
is indicative of his abject state of mind.

'Madam,--I would not take the boldness of writing to your Majesty till
I had shown the King how I do abhor the thing that I have done, and how
much I desire to live to serve him. I hope, madam, by what I have said
to the King to-day will satisfy how sincere I am, and how much I detest
all those people who have brought me to this. Having done this, madam,
I thought I was in a fitt condition to beg your intercession, which I am
sure you never refuse to the distressed, and I am sure, madam, that I
am an object of your pity, having been cousened and cheated into this
horrid business. Did I wish, madam, to live for living sake I would
never give you this trouble, but it is to have life to serve the
King, which I am able to doe, and will doe beyond what I can express.
Therefore, madam, upon such an account as I may take the boldness to
press you and beg of you to intersaid for me, for I am sure, madam, the
King will hearken to you. Your prairs can never be refused, especially
when it is begging for a life only to serve the King. I hope, madam, by
the King's generosity and goodness, and your intercession, I may hope
for my life which if I have shall be ever employed in showing to your
Majesty all the sense immaginable of gratitude, and in serving of the
King like a true subject. And ever be your Majesty's most dutiful and
obedient servant, MONMOUTH.'

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Micah Clarke, by Arthur Conan Doyle

