must then of necessity be hurried as it were down a precipice. As also
in the matter of the shoe, if you go beyond the (necessities of the)
foot, the shoe is gilded, then of a purple color, then embroidered; for
there is no limit to that which has once passed the true measure.

XL.

Women forthwith from the age of fourteen are called by the men
mistresses ([Greek: churiai], dominae). Therefore, since they see that
there is nothing else that they can obtain, but only the power of lying
with men, they begin to decorate themselves, and to place all their
hopes in this. It is worth our while then to take care that they may
know that they are valued (by men) for nothing else than appearing
(being) decent and modest and discreet.

XLI.

It is a mark of a mean capacity to spend much time on the things which
concern the body, such as much exercise, much eating, much drinking,
much easing of the body, much copulation. But these things should be
done as subordinate things; and let all your care be directed to the
mind.

XLII.

When any person treats you ill or speaks ill of you, remember that he
does this or says this because he thinks that it is his duty. It is not
possible then for him to follow that which seems right to you, but that
which seems right to himself. Accordingly if he is wrong in his opinion,
he is the person who is hurt, for he is the person who has been
deceived; for if a man shall suppose the true conjunction to be false,
it is not the conjunction which is hindered, but the man who has been
deceived about it. If you proceed then from these opinions, you will be
mild in temper to him who reviles you; for say on each occasion, It
seemed so to him.

XLIII.

Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be borne, the other
by which it may not. If your brother acts unjustly, do not lay hold of
the act by that handle wherein he acts unjustly, for this is the handle
which cannot be borne; but lay hold of the other, that he is your
brother, that he was nurtured with you, and you will lay hold of the
thing by that handle by which it can be borne.

XLIV.

These reasonings do not cohere: I am richer than you, therefore I am
better than you; I am more eloquent than you, therefore I am better than
you. On the contrary, these rather cohere: I am richer than you,
therefore my possessions are greater than yours; I am more eloquent than
you, therefore my speech is superior to yours. But you are neither
possession nor speech.

XLV.

Does a man bathe quickly (early)? do not say that he bathes badly, but
that he bathes quickly. Does a man drink much wine? do not say that he
does this badly, but say that he drinks much. For before you shall have
determined the opinion how do you know whether he is acting wrong? Thus
it will not happen to you to comprehend some appearances which are
capable of being comprehended, but to assent to others.

XLVI.

On no occasion call yourself a philosopher, and do not speak much among
the uninstructed about theorems (philosophical rules, precepts); but do
that which follows from them. For example, at a banquet do not say how a
man ought to eat, but eat as you ought to eat. For remember that in this
way Socrates also altogether avoided ostentation. Persons used to come
to him and ask to be recommended by him to philosophers, and he used to
take them to philosophers, so easily did he submit to being overlooked.
Accordingly, if any conversation should arise among uninstructed persons
about any theorem, generally be silent; for there is great danger that
you will immediately vomit up what you have not digested. And when a man
shall say to you that you know nothing, and you are not vexed, then be
sure that you have begun the work (of philosophy). For even sheep do not
vomit up their grass and show to the shepherds how much they have eaten;
but when they have internally digested the pasture, they produce
externally wool and milk. Do you also show not your theorems to the
uninstructed, but show the acts which come from their digestion.

XLVII.

When at a small cost you are supplied with everything for the body, do
not be proud of this; nor, if you drink water, say on every occasion, I
drink water. But consider first how much more frugal the poor are than
we, and how much more enduring of labor. And if you ever wish to
exercise yourself in labor and endurance, do it for yourself, and not
for others. Do not embrace statues; but if you are ever very thirsty,
take a draught of cold water and spit it out, and tell no man.

XLVIII.

The condition and characteristic of an uninstructed person is this: he
never expects from himself profit (advantage) nor harm, but from
externals. The condition and characteristic of a philosopher is this: he
expects all advantage and all harm from himself. The signs (marks) of
one who is making progress are these: he censures no man, he praises no
man, he blames no man, he accuses no man, he says nothing about himself
as if he were somebody or knew something; when he is impeded at all or
hindered, he blames himself; if a man praises him he ridicules the
praiser to himself; if a man censures him he makes no defence; he goes
about like weak persons, being careful not to move any of the things
which are placed, before they are firmly fixed; he removes all desire
from himself, and he transfers aversion ([Greek: echchlisin]) to those
things only of the things within our power which are contrary to nature;
he employs a moderate movement towards everything; whether he is
considered foolish or ignorant he cares not; and in a word he watches
himself as if he were an enemy and lying in ambush.

XLIX.

When a man is proud because he can understand and explain the writings
of Chrysippus, say to yourself, If Chrysippus had not written obscurely,
this man would have had nothing to be proud of. But what is it that I
wish? To understand nature and to follow it. I inquire therefore who is
the interpreter? and when I have heard that it is Chrysippus, I come to
him (the interpreter). But I do not understand what is written, and
therefore I seek the interpreter. And so far there is yet nothing to be
proud of. But when I shall have found the interpreter, the thing that
remains is to use the precepts (the lessons). This itself is the only
thing to be proud of. But if I shall admire the exposition, what else
have I been made unless a grammarian instead of a philosopher? except in
one thing, that I am explaining Chrysippus instead of Homer. When, then,
any man says to me, Read Chrysippus to me, I rather blush, when I cannot
show my acts like to and consistent with his words.

L.

Whatever things (rules) are proposed to you (for the conduct of life)
abide by them, as if they were laws, as if you would be guilty of
impiety if you transgressed any of them. And whatever any man shall say
about you, do not attend to it; for this is no affair of yours. How long
will you then still defer thinking yourself worthy of the best things,
and in no matter transgressing the distinctive reason? Have you accepted
the theorems (rules), which it was your duty to agree to, and have you
agreed to them? what teacher then do you still expect that you defer to
him the correction of yourself? You are no longer a youth, but already a
full-grown man. If, then, you are negligent and slothful, and are
continually making procrastination after procrastination, and proposal
(intention) after proposal, and fixing day after day, after which you
will attend to yourself, you will not know that you are not making
improvement, but you will continue ignorant (uninstructed) both while
you live and till you die. Immediately then think it right to live as a
full-grown man, and one who is making proficiency, and let everything
which appears to you to be the best be to you a law which must not be
transgressed. And if anything laborious or pleasant or glorious or
inglorious be presented to you, remember that now is the contest, now
are the Olympic games, and they cannot be deferred; and that it depends
on one defeat and one giving way that progress is either lost or
maintained. Socrates in this way became perfect, in all things improving
himself, attending to nothing except to reason. But you, though you are
not yet a Socrates, ought to live as one who wishes to be a Socrates.

LI.

The first and most necessary place (part, [Greek: topos]) in philosophy
is the use of theorems (precepts, [Greek: theoraemata]), for instance,
that we must not lie; the second part is that of demonstrations, for
instance, How is it proved that we ought not to lie? The third is that
which is confirmatory of these two, and explanatory, for example, How is
this a demonstration? For what is demonstration, what is consequence,
what is contradiction, what is truth, what is falsehood? The third part
(topic) is necessary on account of the second, and the second on account
of the first; but the most necessary and that on which we ought to rest
is the first. But we do the contrary. For we spend our time on the third
topic, and all our earnestness is about it; but we entirely neglect the
first. Therefore we lie; but the demonstration that we ought not to lie
we have ready to hand.

LII.

In every thing (circumstance) we should hold these maxims ready to hand:

  Lead me, O Zeus, and thou O Destiny,
  The way that I am bid by you to go:
  To follow I am ready. If I choose not,
  I make myself a wretch, and still must follow.

  But whoso nobly yields unto necessity,
  We hold him wise, and skill'd in things divine.

And the third also: O Crito, if so it pleases the gods, so let it be;
Anytus and Melitus are able indeed to kill me, but they cannot harm me.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Selection from the Discourses of
Epictetus With the Encheiridion, by Epictetus

