
"We must keep our distance and trust to our gunnery.   She is very
heavily manned, and if she got alongside we might find ourselves in
trouble."

"I see the shakoes of soldiers aboard other."

"Two companies of light infantry from Martinique.  Now we have her!
Hard-a-port, and let her have it as we cross her stern!"

The keen eye of the little commander had seen the surface ripple, which
told of a passing breeze.  He had used it to dart across the big
Frenchman and to rake her with every gun as he passed.  But, once past
her, the _Leda_ had to come back into the wind to keep out of shoal
water.  The manoeuvre brought her on to the starboard side of the
Frenchman, and the trim little frigate seemed to heel right over under
the crashing broadside which burst from the gaping ports.  A moment
later her topmen were swarming aloft to set her top-sails and royals,
and she strove to cross the _Gloire's_ bows and rake her again.  The
French captain, however, brought his frigate's head round, and the two
rode side by side within easy pistol-shot, pouring broadsides into each
other in one of those murderous duels which, could they all be recorded,
would mottle our charts with blood.

In that heavy tropical air, with so faint a breeze, the smoke formed a
thick bank round the two vessels, from which the topmasts only
protruded.  Neither could see anything of its enemy save the throbs of
fire in the darkness, and the guns were sponged and trained and fired
into a dense wall of vapour.  On the poop and the forecastle the
marines, in two little red lines, were pouring in their volleys, but
neither they nor the seamen-gunners could see what effect their fire was
having.   Nor, indeed, could they tell how far they were suffering
themselves, for, standing at a gun, one could but hazily see that upon
the right and the left.  But above the roar of the cannon came the
sharper sound of the piping shot, the crashing of riven planks, and the
occasional heavy thud as spar or block came hurtling on to the deck.
The lieutenants paced up and down the line of guns, while Captain
Johnson fanned the smoke away with his cocked-hat and peered eagerly
out.

"This is rare, Bobby!" said he, as the lieutenant joined him.
Then, suddenly restraining himself, "What have we lost, Mr. Wharton?"

"Our maintopsail yard and our gaff, sir."

"Where's the flag?"

"Gone overboard, sir."

"They'll think we've struck!  Lash a boat's ensign on the starboard arm
of the mizzen cross-jack-yard."

"Yes, sir."

A round-shot dashed the binnacle to pieces between them.  A second
knocked two marines into a bloody palpitating mash.  For a moment the
smoke rose, and the English captain saw that his adversary's heavier
metal was producing a horrible effect.  The _Leda_ was a shattered
wreck.   Her deck was strewed with corpses.  Several of her portholes
were knocked into one, and one of her eighteen-pounder guns had been
thrown right back on to her breech, and pointed straight up to the sky.
The thin line of marines still loaded and fired, but half the guns were
silent, and their crews were piled thickly round them.

"Stand by to repel boarders!" yelled the captain.

"Cutlasses, lads, cutlasses!" roared Wharton.

"Hold your volley till they touch!" cried the captain of marines.

The huge loom of the Frenchman was seen bursting through the smoke.
Thick clusters of boarders hung upon her sides and shrouds.  A final
broad-side leapt from her ports, and the main-mast of the _Leda_,
snapping short off a few feet above the deck, spun into the air and
crashed down upon the port guns, killing ten men and putting the whole
battery out of action.  An instant later the two ships scraped together,
and the starboard bower anchor of the _Gloire_ caught the mizzen-chains
of the _Leda_ upon the port side.  With a yell the black swarm of
boarders steadied themselves for a spring.

But their feet were never to reach that blood-stained deck.  From some
where there came a well-aimed whiff of grape, and another, and another.
The English marines and seamen, waiting with cutlass and musket behind
the silent guns, saw with amazement the dark masses thinning and
shredding away.  At the same time the port broadside of the Frenchman
burst into a roar.

"Clear away the wreck!" roared the captain.   "What the devil are they
firing at?"

"Get the guns clear!" panted the lieutenant.  "We'll do them yet, boys!"

The wreckage was torn and hacked and splintered until first one gun and
then another roared into action again.  The Frenchman's anchor had been
cut away, and the _Leda_ had worked herself free from that fatal hug.
But now, suddenly, there was a scurry up the shrouds of the _Gloire_,
and a hundred Englishmen were shouting themselves hoarse: "They're
running!  They're running!  They're running!"

And it was true.  The Frenchman had ceased to fire, and was intent only
upon clapping on every sail that he could carry.  But that shouting
hundred could not claim it all as their own.  As the smoke cleared it
was not difficult to see the reason.  The ships had gained the mouth of
the estuary during the fight, and there, about four miles out to sea,
was the _Leda's_ consort bearing down under full sail to the sound of
the guns.  Captain de Milon had done his part for one day, and presently
the _Gloire_ was drawing off swiftly to the north, while the _Dido_ was
bowling along at her skirts, rattling away with her bow-chasers, until a
headland hid them both from view.

But the Leda lay sorely stricken, with her mainmast gone, her bulwarks
shattered, her mizzen-topmast and gaff shot away, her sails like a
beggar's rags, and a hundred of her crew dead and wounded.  Close beside
her a mass of wreckage floated upon the waves.  It was the stern-post of
a mangled vessel, and across it, in white letters on a black ground, was
printed, "_The Slapping Sal_."

"By the Lord! it was the brig that saved us!" cried Mr. Wharton.
"Hudson brought her into action with the Frenchman, and was blown out of
the water by a broadside!"

The little captain turned on his heel and paced up and down the deck.

Already his crew were plugging the shot-holes, knotting and splicing and
mending.  When he came back, the lieutenant saw a softening of the stern
lines about his eyes and mouth.

"Are they all gone?"

"Every man.  They must have sunk with the wreck."

The two officers looked down at the sinister name, and at the stump of
wreckage which floated in the discoloured water.  Something black washed
to and fro beside a splintered gaff and a tangle of halliards.  It was
the outrageous ensign, and near it a scarlet cap was floating.

"He was a villain, but he was a Briton!" said the captain at last.
"He lived like a dog, but, by God, he died like a man!"


THE END.
















End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Shadow and Other Napoleonic
Tales, by Arthur Conan Doyle

