a certain amount of success attended the object of the expedition, the
fate of Burke and his immediate companions was most deplorable. They
perished by starvation!




CONCLUSION.


I have now told you all that my present limits will admit, of those
interesting portions of the globe, called America and Australia, and I
wish you to read again all that I have said, and I wish you also to view
the inhuman conduct of the first discoverers of the former with proper
feelings of aversion. If you have read an account of William Penn's
first colony of Pennsylvania, you will see that his was the only just
way of establishing himself among the Indians. You must rejoice within
yourselves on this occasion, that they were not Englishmen who practised
these acts of cruelty and treachery towards the unoffending Mexicans and
Peruvians. The workings of Providence are full of mystery, and I cannot
help thinking that the state of anarchy and civil war in which Spain and
Portugal are now and ever have been engaged, is an act of retribution
awarded to their barbarity in the great scheme of God's providence.

It makes one blush for the sake of Christianity, to think that the
perpetrators of the outrages upon the original possessors of the
Americas were persons professing that sublime religion,--and that in the
midst of their slaughter and plunder, they impiously held forth the
cross of Christ. The confiding but dignified nature of the idolatrous
Mexicans, did much more honour to the purity of the Christian religion
than did the base treachery of their invaders, who professed Christ but
knew him not.

Had they by mildness, perseverance, and reason convinced the inhabitants
of the truth of the Christian religion, they might have become faithful
converts, but it was unreasonable to expect that they should cast off
the religion which their forefathers had professed, for a religion which
they knew not at all, and the professors of which came with the sword to
deprive them of their lives and their property.

I wish you, my young friends, to weigh all these circumstances whenever
you read. It will impress the different subjects more thoroughly upon
your memory; and if your minds be properly constituted, it will
cultivate the good and eradicate the bad. I will again ask you to read
this book a second time, and refer occasionally to the maps. And now
good-bye!



THE END.




Billing, Printer and Stereotyper, Guildford, Surrey.



