
Three acts of Parliament--the Navigation Act of 1660, the Staple Act
of 1663, and the Act of 1673 imposing Plantation Duties--laid the
foundation of the old colonial system of Great Britain. Contrary to
the somewhat passionate contentions of older historians, they were not
designed in any tyrannical spirit, though they embodied a theory of
colonization and trade which has long since been discarded. In the
seventeenth century colonies were regarded as plantations existing
solely for the benefit of the mother country. Therefore their trade and
industry must be regulated so as to contribute most to the sea power,
the commerce, and the industry of the home country which gave them
protection. Sir Josiah Child was only expressing a commonplace
observation of the mercantilists when he wrote "That all colonies or
plantations do endamage their Mother-Kingdoms, whereof the trades of
such Plantations are not confined by severe Laws, and good execution of
those Laws, to the Mother-Kingdom."

The Navigation Act of 1660, following the policy laid down in the
statute of 1651 enacted under the Commonwealth, was a direct blow aimed
at the Dutch, who were fast monopolizing the carrying trade. It forbade
any goods to be imported into or exported from His Majesty's plantations
except in English, Irish, or colonial vessels of which the master
and three fourths of the crew must be English; and it forbade the
importation into England of any goods produced in the plantations unless
carried in English bottoms. Contemporary Englishmen hailed this act
as the Magna Charta of the Sea. There was no attempt to disguise its
purpose. "The Bent and Design," wrote Charles Davenant, "was to make
those colonies as much dependant as possible upon their Mother-Country,"
by preventing them from trading independently and so diverting their
wealth. The effect would be to give English, Irish, and colonial
shipping a monopoly of the carrying trade within the Empire. The act
also aided English merchants by the requirement that goods of foreign
origin should be imported directly from the place of production; and
that certain enumerated commodities of the plantations should be carried
only to English ports. These enumerated commodities were products of the
southern and semitropical plantations: "Sugars, Tobacco, Cotton-wool,
Indicoes, Ginger, Fustick or other dyeing wood."

To benefit British merchants still more directly by making England the
staple not only of plantation products but also of all commodities of
all countries, the Act of 1663 was passed by Parliament. "No Commoditie
of the Growth Production or Manufacture of Europe shall be imported into
any Land Island Plantation Colony Territory or Place to His Majestie
belonging... but what shall be bona fide and without fraude laden and
shipped in England Wales [and] the Towne of Berwicke upon Tweede and
in English built Shipping." The preamble to this famous act breathed no
hostile intent. The design was to maintain "a greater correspondence and
kindnesse" between the plantations and the mother country; to encourage
shipping; to render navigation cheaper and safer; to make "this Kingdome
a Staple not only of the Commodities of those Plantations but also
of the Commodities of other Countries and places for the supplying
of them--" it "being the usage of other nations to keepe their
[Plantations] Trade to themselves."

The Act of 1673 was passed to meet certain difficulties which arose
in the administration of the Act of 1660. The earlier act permitted
colonial vessels to carry enumerated commodities from the place of
production to another plantation without paying duties. Under cover of
this provision, it was assumed that enumerated commodities, after being
taken to a plantation, could then be sent directly to continental ports
free of duty. The new act provided that, before vessels left a colonial
port, bonds should be given that the enumerated commodities would be
carried only to England. If bonds were not given and the commodities
were taken to another colonial port, plantation duties were collected
according to a prescribed schedule.

These acts were not rigorously enforced until after the passage of the
administrative act of 1696 and the establishment of admiralty courts.
Even then it does not appear that they bore heavily on the colonies,
or occasioned serious protest. The trade acts of 1764 and 1765 are
described in "The Eve of the Revolution".--EDITOR.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

The literature of the Colonial South is like the leaves of Vallombrosa
for multitude. Here may be indicated some volumes useful in any general
survey.


VIRGINIA

Hakluyt's "Principal Voyages." 12 vols. (Hakluyt Society. Extra Series,
1905-1907.) "The Prose Epic of the modern English nation."

"Purchas, His Pilgrims." 20 vols. (Hakluyt Society, Extra Series,
1905-1907.)

Hening's "Statutes at Large," published in 1823, is an eminently
valuable collection of the laws of colonial Virginia, beginning with the
Assembly of 1619. Hening's own quotation from Priestley, "The Laws of
a country are necessarily connected with everything belonging to the
people of it: so that a thorough knowledge of them and of their progress
would inform us of everything that was most useful to be known,"
indicates the range and weight of his thirteen volumes.

William Stith's "The History of the Discovery and First Settlement of
Virginia" (1747) gives some valuable documents and a picture of the
first years at Jamestown.

Alexander Brown's "Genesis of the United States", 2 vols. (1890), is
a very valuable work, giving historical manuscripts and tracts. Less
valuable is his "First Republic in America" (1898), in which the author
attempts to weave his material into a historical narrative.

Philip A. Bruce's "Economic History of Virginia in the Seventeenth
Century", 2 vols. (1896), is a highly interesting and exhaustive survey.
The same author has written "Social Life of Virginia in the Seventeenth
Century" (1907) and "Institutional History of Virginia in the
Seventeenth Century", 2 vols. (1910).

John Fiske's "Virginia and Her Neighbors," 2 vols. (1897), and John E.
Cooke's Virginia (American Commonwealth Series, 1883) are written in
lighter vein than the foregoing histories and possess much literary
distinction.

On Captain John Smith there are writings innumerable. Some writers give
credence to Smith's own narratives, while others do not. John Fiske
accepts the narratives as history, and Edward Arber, who has edited
them (2 vols., 1884), holds that the "General History" (1624) is more
reliable than the "True Relation" (1608). On the other side, as doubters
of Smith's credibility, are ranged such weighty authorities as Charles
Deane, Henry Adams, and Alexander Brown.

Thomas J. Wertenbaker's "Virginia under the Stuarts" (1914) is a
painstaking effort to set forth the political history of the colony in
the light of recent historical investigation, but the book is devoid of
literary attractiveness.


MARYLAND

"The Archives of Maryland", 37 vols. (1883-) contain the official
documents of the province. John L. Bozman's "History of Maryland", 2
vols. (1837), contains much valuable material for the years 1634-1658.

J. T. Scharf's "History of Maryland", 3 vols. (1879), is a solid piece
of work; but the reader will turn by preference to the more readable
books by John Fiske, "Virginia and Her Neighbors", and William H.
Browne, "Maryland, The History of a Palatinate" ("American Commonwealth
Series," 1884). Browne has also written "George and Cecilius Calvert"
(1890).


THE CAROLINAS

"The Colonial Records of North Carolina", 10 vols. (1886-1890), are a
mine of information about both North and South Carolina.

Francis L. Hawks's "History of North Carolina", 2 vols. (1857-8),
remains the most substantial work on the colony to the year 1729.

Samuel A. Ashe's "History of North Carolina" (1908) carries the
political history down to 1783.

Edward McCrady's "History of South Carolina under the Proprietary
Government" (1897) and "South Carolina under the Royal Government"
(1899) have superseded the older histories by Ramsay and Hewitt.


GEORGIA

The best histories of Georgia are those by William B. Stevens, 2 vols.
(1847, 1859), and Charles C. Jones, 2 vols. (1883). Robert Wright's
"Memoir of General James Oglethorpe" (1867) is still the best life of
the founder of Georgia.

In the "American Nation Series" and in Winsor's "Narrative and Critical
History of America", the reader will find accounts of the Southern
colonies written by specialists and accompanied by much critical
apparatus. Further lists will be found appended to the articles on the
several States in "The Encyclopaedia Britannica", 11th edition.





End of Project Gutenberg's Pioneers of the Old South, by Mary Johnston

