States," Panama, Guatemala, Brazil, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica.
Since the Dominican Republic at the time was under American military
control, it was not in a position to choose its course. Four countries
Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Uruguay--broke off diplomatic relations
with Germany. The other seven republics--Mexico, Salvador, Colombia,
Venezuela, Chile, Argentina, and Paraguay--continued their formal
neutrality. In spite of a disclosure made by the United States of
insulting and threatening utterances on the part of the German charge
d'affaires in Argentina, which led to popular outbreaks at the capital
and induced the national Congress to declare in favor of a severance of
diplomatic relations with that functionary's Government, the President
of the republic stood firm in his resolution to maintain neutrality.
If Pan-Americanism had ever involved the idea of political cooperation
among the nations of the New World, it broke down just when it might
have served the greatest of purposes. Even the "A B C" combination
itself had apparently been shattered.

A century and more had now passed since the Spanish and Portuguese
peoples of the New World had achieved their independence. Eighteen
political children of various sizes and stages of advancement, or
backwardness, were born of Spain in America, and one acknowledged the
maternity of Portugal. Big Brazil has always maintained the happiest
relations with the little mother in Europe, who still watches with
pride the growth of her strapping youngster. Between Spain and her
descendants, however, animosity endured for many years after they had
thrown off the parental yoke. Yet of late, much has been done on both
sides to render the relationship cordial. The graceful act of Spain in
sending the much-beloved Infanta Isabel to represent her in Argentina
and Chile at the celebration of the centennial anniversary of their cry
for independence, and to wish them Godspeed on their onward journey, was
typical of the yearning of the mother country for her children overseas,
despite the lapse of years and political ties. So, too, her ablest men
of intellect have striven nobly and with marked success to revive
among them a sense of filial affection and gratitude for all that Spain
contributed to mold the mind and heart of her kindred in distant
lands. On their part, the Hispanic Americans have come to a clearer
consciousness of the fact that on the continents of the New World there
are two distinct types of civilization, with all that each connotes of
differences in race, psychology, tradition, language, and custom--their
own, and that represented by the United States. Appreciative though
the southern countries are of their northern neighbor, they cling
nevertheless to their heritage from Spain and Portugal in whatever seems
conducive to the maintenance of their own ideals of life and thought.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

For anything like a detailed study of the history of the Hispanic
nations of America, obviously one must consult works written in Spanish
and Portuguese. There are many important books, also, in French and
German; but, with few exceptions, the recommendations for the general
reader will be limited to accounts in English.

A very useful outline and guide to recent literature on the subject is
W. W. Pierson, Jr., "A Syllabus of Latin-American History" (Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, 1917). A brief introduction to the history and present
aspects of Hispanic American civilization is W. R. Shepherd, "Latin
America" (New York, 1914). The best general accounts of the Spanish
and Portuguese colonial systems will be found in Charles de Lannoy and
Herman van der Linden, "Histoire de L'Expansion Coloniale des Peuples
Europeans: Portugal et Espagne" (Brussels and Paris, 1907), and Kurt
Simon, "Spanien and Portugal als See and Kolonialmdchte" (Hamburg,
1913). For the Spanish colonial regime alone, E. G. Bourne, "Spain in
America" (New York, 1904) is excellent. The situation in southern South
America toward the close of Spanish rule is well described in Bernard
Moses, "South America on the Eve of Emancipation" (New York, 1908).
Among contemporary accounts of that period, Alexander von Humboldt and
Aime Bonpland, "Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions
of America", 3 vols. (London, 1881); Alexander von Humboldt, "Political
Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain", 4 vols. (London,1811-1822); and F.
R. J. de Pons, "Travels in South America", 2 vols. (London, 1807), are
authoritative, even if not always easy to read.

On the wars of independence, see the scholarly treatise by W. S.
Robertson, "Rise of the Spanish-American Republics as Told in the
Lives of their Liberators" (New York, 1918); Bartolome Mitre, "The
Emancipation of South America" (London, 1893)--a condensed translation
of the author's "Historia de San Martin", and wholly favorable to that
patriot; and F. L. Petre, "Simon Bolivar" (London, 1910)--impartial
at the expense of the imagination. Among the numerous contemporary
accounts, the following will be found serviceable: W. D. Robinson,
"Memoirs of the Mexican Revolution" (Philadelphia, 1890); J. R.
Poinsett, "Notes on Mexico" (London, 1825); H. M. Brackenridge, "Voyage
to South America," 2 vols. (London, 1820); W. B. Stevenson, "Historical
and Descriptive Narrative of Twenty Years' Residence in South America",
3 vols. (London, 1895); J. Miller, "Memoirs of General Miller in the
Service of the Republic of Peru", 2 vols. (London, 1828); H. L. V.
Ducoudray Holstein, "Memoirs of Simon Bolivar", 2 vols. (London, 1830),
and John Armitage, "History of Brazil", 2 vols. (London, 1836).

The best books on the history of the republics as a whole since the
attainment of independence, and written from an Hispanic American
viewpoint, are F. Garcia Calderon, "Latin America, its Rise and
Progress" (New York, 1913), and M. de Oliveira Lima, "The Evolution of
Brazil Compared with that of Spanish and Anglo-Saxon America" (Stanford
University, California, 1914). The countries of Central America are
dealt with by W. H. Koebel, "Central America" (New York, 1917), and of
South America by T. C. Dawson, "The South American Republics", 2 vols.
(New York, 1903-1904), and C. E. Akers, "History of South America"
(London, 1912), though in a manner that often confuses rather than
enlightens.

Among the histories and descriptions of individual countries, arranged
in alphabetical order, the following are probably the most useful to the
general reader: W. A. Hirst, "Argentina" (New York, 1910); Paul Walle,
"Bolivia" (New York, 1914); Pierre Denis, "Brazil" (New York, 1911);
G. F. S. Elliot, "Chile" (New York, 1907); P. J. Eder, "Colombia" (New
York, 1913); J. B. Calvo, "The Republic of Costa Rica" (Chicago, 1890);
A. G. Robinson, "Cuba, Old and New" (New York, 1915); Otto Schoenrich,
"Santo Domingo" (New York, 1918); C. R. Enock, "Ecuador" (New York,
1914); C. R. Enock, "Mexico" (New York, 1909); W. H. Koebel, "Paraguay"
(New York, 1917); C. R. Enock, "Peru" (New York, 1910); W. H. Koebel,
"Uruguay" (New York, 1911), and L. V. Dalton, "Venezuela" (New York,
1912). Of these, the books by Robinson and Eder, on Cuba and Colombia,
respectively, are the most readable and reliable.

For additional bibliographical references see "South America" and the
articles on individual countries in "The Encyclopaedia Britannica", 11th
edition, and in Marrion Wilcox and G. E. Rines, "Encyclopedia of Latin
America" (New York, 1917).

Of contemporary or later works descriptive of the life and times of
eminent characters in the history of the Hispanic American republics
since 1830, a few may be taken as representative. Rosas: J. A. King,
"Twenty-four Years in the Argentine Republic" (London, 1846), and
Woodbine Parish, "Buenos Ayres and the Provinces of the Rio de la Plata"
(London, 1850). Francia: J. R. Rengger, "Reign of Dr. Joseph Gaspard
Roderick [!] de Francia in Paraguay" (London, 1827); J. P. and W. P.
Robertson, "Letters on South America", 3 vols. (London, 1843), and E.
L. White, "El Supremo", a novel (New York, 1916). Santa Anna: Waddy
Thompson, "Recollections of Mexico" (New York, 1846), and F. E. Ingles,
Calderon de la Barca, "Life in Mexico" (London, 1859.). Juarez: U.
R. Burke, "Life of Benito Juarez" (London, 1894). Solano Lopez: T. J.
Hutchinson, "Parana; with Incidents of the Paraguayan War and South
American Recollections" (London, 1868); George Thompson, "The War in
Paraguay" (London, 1869); R. F. Burton, "Letters from the Battle-fields
of Paraguay" (London, 1870), and C. A. Washburn, "The History of
Paraguay", 2 vols. (Boston, 1871). Pedro II: J. C. Fletcher and D. P.
Kidder, "Brazil and the Brazilians" (Boston, 1879), and Frank Bennett,
"Forty Years in Brazil"(London, 1914). Garcia Moreno: Frederick
Hassaurek, "Four Years among Spanish Americans"(New York, 1867). Guzman
Blanco: C. D. Dance, "Recollections of Four Years in Venezuela" (London,
1876). Diaz: James Creelman, "Diaz, Master of Mexico" (New York, 1911).
Balmaceda: M. H. Hervey, "Dark Days in Chile" (London, 1891-1890.
Carranza: L. Gutierrez de Lara and Edgcumb Pinchon, "The Mexican People:
their Struggle for Freedom" (New York, 1914).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hispanic Nations of the New World, by 
William R. Shepherd

