economic and political influence of the opening of inland water routes,
to volumes of a more popular character such as Francis W. Halsey's "The
Old New York Frontier" (1901), Frank H. Severance's "Old Trails on the
Niagara Frontier" (1903) for the North, and Charles A. Hanna's "The
Wilderness Trail", 2 vols. (1911), and Thomas Speed's "The Wilderness
Road" ("The Filson Club Publications," vol. II, 1886) for Pennsylvania,
Virginia, and Kentucky. The value of Hanna's work deserves special
mention.

For the early phases of inland navigation John Pickell's "A New Chapter
in the Early Life of Washington" (1856), is an excellent work of the
old-fashioned type, while in Herbert B. Adams's "Maryland's Influence
upon Land Cessions to the United States" ("Johns Hopkins University
Studies in Historical and Political Science, Third Series," I, 1885)
a master-hand pays Washington his due for originating plans of
trans-Alleghany solidarity; this likewise is the theme of Archer
B. Hulbert's "Washington and the West" (1905) wherein is printed
Washington's "Diary of September, 1784," containing the first and
unexpurgated draft of his classic letter to Harrison of that year. The
publications of the various societies for internal improvement and state
boards of control and a few books, such as Turner Camac's "Facts and
Arguments Respecting the Great Utility of an Extensive Plan of Inland
Navigation in America" (1805), give the student distinct impressions of
the difficulties and the ideals of the first great American promoters
of inland commerce. Elkanah Watson's "History of the... Western Canals
in the State of New York" (1820), despite inaccuracies due to lapses of
memory, should be specially remarked.

For the rise and progress of turnpike building one must remember W.
Kingsford's "History, Structure, and Statistics of Plank Roads" (1852),
a reliable book by a careful writer. The Cumberland (National) Road has
its political influence carefully adjudged by Jeremiah S. Young in "A
Political and Constitutional Study of the Cumberland Road" (1904), while
the social and personal side is interestingly treated in county history
style in Thomas B. Searight's "The Old Pike" (1894). Motorists will
appreciate Robert Bruce's "The National Road" (1916), handsomely
illustrated and containing forty-odd sectional maps.

The best life of Fulton is H. W. Dickinson's "Robert Fulton, Engineer
and Artist: His Life and Works" (1913), while in Alice Crary Sutcliffe's
"Robert Fulton and the 'Clermont'" (1909), the more intimate picture
of a family biography is given. For the controversy concerning the
Fulton-Livingston monopoly, note W. A. Duer's "A Course of Lectures on
Constitutional Jurisprudence" and his pamphlets addressed to Cadwallader
D. Colden. The life of that stranger to success, the forlorn John Fitch,
was written sympathetically and after assiduous research by Thompson
Westcott in his "Life of John Fitch the Inventor of the Steamboat"
(1858). For the pamphlet war between Fitch and Rumsey see Allibone's
Dictionary.

The Great Lakes have not been adequately treated. E. Channing and M. F.
Lansing's "The Story of the Great Lakes" (1909) is reliable but deals
very largely with the routine history covered by the works of Parkman.
J. O. Curwood's "The Great Lakes" (1909) is stereotyped in its scope but
has certain chapters of interest to students of commercial development,
as has also "The Story of the Great Lakes." The vast bulk of material of
value on the subject lies in the publications of the New York, Buffalo,
Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, and Chicago Historical Societies, whose
lists should be consulted. These publications also give much data on the
Mississippi River and western commercial development. S. L. Clemens's
"Life on the Mississippi" (in his "Writings," vol. IX,1869-1909) is
invaluable for its graphic pictures of steamboating in the heyday
of river traffic. A. B. Hulbert's "Waterways of Western Expansion"
("Historic Highways," vol. IX, 1903) and "The Ohio River" (1906) give
chapters on commerce and transportation. For the beginnings of traffic
into the Far West, H. Inman's "The Old Santa Fe Trail" (1897) and
"The Great Salt Lake Trail" (1914) may be consulted, together with
the publications of the various state historical societies of the
trans-Mississippi States.

Various bibliographies on this general subject have been issued by the
Library of Congress. Seymour Dunbar gives a good bibliography in his
"A History of Travel in America," 4 vols. (1915). The student will find
quantities of material in books of travel, in which connection he would
do well to consult Solon J. Buck's "Travel and Description, 1765-1865"
("Illinois State Historical Library Collections," vol. IX, 1914).





End of Project Gutenberg's The Paths of Inland Commerce, by Archer B. Hulbert

