 * Justice Bradley in ex parte Siebold, 100 U.S., 371.


It is only when we turn to that branch of Constitutional Law which
defines governmental power in relation to private rights that we
lose touch with Marshall's principles. As we have seen, he dealt in
absolutes: either power was given to an unlimited extent or it was
withheld altogether. Today, however, the dominant rule in this field of
Constitutional Law is the "rule of reason." In the last analysis, there
are few private rights which are not subordinate to the general welfare;
but, on the other hand, legislation which affects private rights must
have a reasonable tendency to promote the general welfare and must not
arbitrarily invade the rights of particular persons or classes. Inasmuch
as the hard and fast rules of an age when conditions of life were
simpler are no longer practicable under the more complex relationships
of modern times, there is today an inevitable tendency to force these
rules to greater flexibility. *


 * Notwithstanding what is said above, it is also true that the
modern doctrine of "the police power" owes something to Marshall's
interpretation of the "necessary and proper" clause in M'Culloch
vs. Maryland, which is frequently offered nowadays as stating the
authoritative definition of "a fair legislative discretion" in relation
to private rights. Indeed this ingenious transposition was first
suggested in Marshall's day. See Cowen (N. Y.), 585. But it never
received his sanction and does not represent his point of view.


And this difference in the point of view of the judiciary connotes a
general difference of outlook which makes itself felt today even in
that field where Marshall wrought most enduringly. The Constitution was
established under the sway of the idea of the balance of power, and with
the purpose of effecting a compromise among a variety of more or less
antagonistic interests, some of which were identified with the cause
of local autonomy, others of which coalesced with the cause of National
Supremacy. The Nation and the States were regarded as competitive
forces, and a condition of tension between them was thought to be not
only normal but desirable. The modern point of view is very different.
Local differences have to a great extent disappeared, and that general
interest which is the same for all the States is an ever deepening one.
The idea of the competition of the States with the Nation is yielding
to that of their cooperation in public service. And it is much the same
with the relation of the three departments of Government. The notion
that they have antagonistic interests to guard is giving way to the
perception of a general interest guarded by all according to their
several faculties. In brief, whereas it was the original effort of
the Constitution to preserve a somewhat complex set of values by nice
differentiations of power, the present tendency, born of a surer vision
of a single national welfare, is toward the participation of all powers
in a joint effort for a common end.

But though Marshall's work has been superseded at many points, there is
no fame among American statesmen more strongly bulwarked by great and
still vital institutions. Marshall established judicial review; he
imparted to an ancient legal tradition a new significance; he made
his Court one of the great political forces of the country; he founded
American Constitutional Law; he formulated, more tellingly than any one
else and for a people whose thought was permeated with legalism, the
principles on which the integrity and ordered growth of their Nation
have depended. Springing from the twin rootage of Magna Charta and
the Declaration of Independence, his judicial statesmanship finds no
parallel in the salient features of its achievement outside our own
annals.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

All accounts of Marshall's career previous to his appointment as Chief
Justice have been superseded by Albert J. Beveridge's two admirable
volumes, "The Life of John Marshall" (Boston, 1916). The author paints
on a large canvas and with notable skill. His work is history as well as
biography. His ample plan enables him to quote liberally from Marshall's
writings and from all the really valuable first-hand sources. Both
text and notes are valuable repositories of material. Beveridge has
substantially completed a third volume covering the first decade of
Marshall's chief-justiceship, and the entire work will probably run to
five volumes.

Briefer accounts of Marshall covering his entire career will be found in
Henry Flanders's "Lives and Times of the Chief Justices of the Supreme
Court" (1875) and Van Santvoord's "Sketches of the Lives, Times, and
Judicial Services of the Chief Justices of the Supreme Court" (1882).
Two excellent brief sketches are J. B. Thayer's "John Marshall" (1901)
in the "Riverside Biographical Series," and W. D. Lewis's essay in the
second volume of "The Great American Lawyers," 8 vols. (Philadelphia,
1907), of which he is also the editor. The latter is particularly happy
in its blend of the personal and legal, the biographical and critical.
A. B. Magruder's "John Marshall" (1898) in the "American Statesman
Series" falls considerably below the general standard maintained by that
excellent series.

The centennial anniversary of Marshall's accession to the Supreme Bench
was generally observed by Bench and Bar throughout the United States,
and many of the addresses on the great Chief Justice's life and judicial
services delivered by distinguished judges and lawyers on that occasion
were later collected by John F. Dillon and published in "John Marshall,
Life, Character, and Judicial Services," 3 vols. (Chicago, 1903). In
volume XIII of the "Green Bag" will be found a skillfully constructed
mosaic biography of Marshall drawn from these addresses.

The most considerable group of Marshall's letters yet published are
those to Justice Story, which will be found in the "Massachusetts
Historical Society Proceedings," Second Series, volume XIV, pp. 321-60.
These and most of the Chief Justice's other letters which have thus
far seen the light of day will be found in J. E. Oster's "Political and
Economic Doctrines of John Marshall" (New York, 1914). Here also will be
found a copy of Marshall's will, of the autobiography which he prepared
in 1818 for Delaplaine's "Repository" but which was never published
there, and of his eulogy of his wife. The two principal sources of
Marshall's anecdotes are the "Southern Literary Messenger," volume
II, p.181 ff., and Henry Howe's "Historical Collections of Virginia"
(Charleston, 1845). Approaching the value of sources are Joseph Story's
"Discourse upon the Life, Character, and Services of the Hon. John
Marshall" (1835) and Horace Binney's "Eulogy" (1835), both of which were
pronounced by personal friends shortly after Marshall's death and both
of which are now available in volume III of Dillon's compilation, cited
above. The value of Marshall's "Life of Washington" as bearing on
the origin of his own point of view in politics was noted in the text
(Chapter VIII).

Marshall's great constitutional decisions are, of course, accessible in
the Reports, but they have also been assembled into a single volume
by John M. Dillon, "John Marshall; Complete Constitutional Decisions"
(Chicago, 1903), and into two instructively edited volumes by Joseph P.
Cotton, "Constitutional Decisions of John Marshall" (New York, 1905).
Story's famous "Commentaries on the Constitution" gives a systematic
presentation of Marshall's constitutional doctrines, which is fortified
at all points by historical reference; the second edition is the best.
For other contemporary evaluations of Marshall's decisions, often
hostile, see early volumes of the "North American Review" and Niles's
"Register;" also the volumes of the famous John Taylor of Caroline. A
brief general account of later date of the decisions is to be found
in the "Constitutional History of the United States as Seen in the
Development of American Law" (New York, 1889), a course of lectures
before the Political Science Association of the University of Michigan.
Detailed commentary of a high order of scholarship is furnished by
Walter Malins Rose's "Notes" to the Lawyers' Edition of the United
States Reports, 13 vols. (1899-1901). The more valuable of Marshall's
decisions on circuit are collected in J. W. Brockenbrough's two volumes
of "Reports of Cases Decided by the Hon. John Marshall" (Philadelphia,
1837), and his rulings at Burr's Trial are to be found in Robertson's
"Reports of the Trials of Colonel Aaron Burr," 2 vols. (1808).

Marshall's associates on the Supreme Bench are pleasingly sketched in
Hampton L. Carson's "Supreme Court of the United States" (Philadelphia,
1891), which also gives many interesting facts bearing on the history
of the Court itself. In the same connection Charles Warren's "History
of the American Bar" (Boston, 1911) is, also valuable both for the facts
which it records and for the guidance it affords to further material.
Of biographies of contemporaries and coworkers of Marshall, the most
valuable are John P. Kennedy's "Memoirs of the Life of William Wirt," 2
vols. (Philadelphia, 1880); William Wetmore Story's "Life and Letters of
Joseph Story," 2 vols. (Boston, 1851); and William Kent's "Memoirs and
Letters of James Kent" (Boston, 1898). Everett P. Wheeler's "Daniel
Webster the Expounder of the Constitution" (1905) is instructive, but
claims far too much for Webster's influence upon Marshall's views.
New England has never yet quite forgiven Virginia for having had the
temerity to take the formative hand in shaping our Constitutional
Law. The vast amount of material brought together in Gustavus Myers's
"History of the Supreme Court" (Chicago, 1912) is based on purely ex
parte statements and is so poorly authenticated as to be valueless. He
writes from the socialistic point of view and fluctuates between the
desire to establish the dogma of "class bias" by a coldly impartial
examination of the "facts" and the desire to start a scandal reflecting
on individual reputations.

The literature of eulogy and appreciation is, for all practical
purposes, exhausted in Dillon's collection. But a reference should be
made here to a brief but pertinent and excellently phrased comment on
the great Chief Justice in Woodrow Wilson's "Constitutional Government
in the United States" (New York, 1908), pp.158-9.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of John Marshall and the Constitution, by 
Edward S. Corwin

