could this mystic Cornelius be the sensible exponent; seeming, as he
did, to live ever in close relationship with, and recognition of, a
mental view, a source of discernment, a light upon his way, which had
certainly not yet sprung up for Marius?  Meantime, the discretion of
Cornelius, his energetic clearness and purity, were a charm, rather
physical than moral: his exquisite correctness of spirit, at all
events, accorded so perfectly with the regular beauty of his person, as
to seem to depend upon it. And wholly different as was this later
friendship, with its exigency, its warnings, its restraints, from the
feverish attachment to Flavian, which had made him at times like an
uneasy slave, still, like that, it was a reconciliation to the world of
sense, the visible world.  From the hopefulness of this gracious
presence, all visible things around him, even the commonest objects of
everyday life--if they but [235] stood together to warm their hands at
the same fire--took for him a new poetry, a delicate fresh bloom, and
interest.  It was as if his bodily eyes had been indeed mystically
washed, renewed, strengthened.

And how eagerly, with what a light heart, would Flavian have taken his
place in the amphitheatre, among the youth of his own age! with what an
appetite for every detail of the entertainment, and its various
accessories:--the sunshine, filtered into soft gold by the vela, with
their serpentine patterning, spread over the more select part of the
company; the Vestal virgins, taking their privilege of seats near the
empress Faustina, who sat there in a maze of double-coloured gems,
changing, as she moved, like the waves of the sea; the cool circle of
shadow, in which the wonderful toilets of the fashionable told so
effectively around the blazing arena, covered again and again during
the many hours' show, with clean sand for the absorption of certain
great red patches there, by troops of white-shirted boys, for whom the
good-natured audience provided a scramble of nuts and small coin, flung
to them over a trellis-work of silver-gilt and amber, precious gift of
Nero, while a rain of flowers and perfume fell over themselves, as they
paused between the parts of their long feast upon the spectacle of
animal suffering.

During his sojourn at Ephesus, Lucius Verus had readily become a
patron, patron or protege, [236] of the great goddess of Ephesus, the
goddess of hunters; and the show, celebrated by way of a compliment to
him to-day, was to present some incidents of her story, where she
figures almost as the genius of madness, in animals, or in the humanity
which comes in contact with them.  The entertainment would have an
element of old Greek revival in it, welcome to the taste of a learned
and Hellenising society; and, as Lucius Verus was in some sense a lover
of animals, was to be a display of animals mainly. There would be real
wild and domestic creatures, all of rare species; and a real slaughter.
On so happy an occasion, it was hoped, the elder emperor might even
concede a point, and a living criminal fall into the jaws of the wild
beasts.  And the spectacle was, certainly, to end in the destruction,
by one mighty shower of arrows, of a hundred lions, "nobly" provided by
Aurelius himself for the amusement of his people.--Tam magnanimus fuit!

The arena, decked and in order for the first scene, looked delightfully
fresh, re-inforcing on the spirits of the audience the actual freshness
of the morning, which at this season still brought the dew.  Along the
subterranean ways that led up to it, the sound of an advancing chorus
was heard at last, chanting the words of a sacred song, or hymn to
Diana; for the spectacle of the amphitheatre was, after all, a [237]
religious occasion.  To its grim acts of blood-shedding a kind of
sacrificial character still belonged in the view of certain religious
casuists, tending conveniently to soothe the humane sensibilities of so
pious an emperor as Aurelius, who, in his fraternal complacency, had
consented to preside over the shows.

Artemis or Diana, as she may be understood in the actual development of
her worship, was, indeed, the symbolical expression of two allied yet
contrasted elements of human temper and experience--man's amity, and
also his enmity, towards the wild creatures, when they were still, in a
certain sense, his brothers.  She is the complete, and therefore highly
complex, representative of a state, in which man was still much
occupied with animals, not as his flock, or as his servants after the
pastoral relationship of our later, orderly world, but rather as his
equals, on friendly terms or the reverse,--a state full of primeval
sympathies and antipathies, of rivalries and common wants--while he
watched, and could enter into, the humours of those "younger brothers,"
with an intimacy, the "survivals" of which in a later age seem often to
have had a kind of madness about them.  Diana represents alike the
bright and the dark side of such relationship. But the humanities of
that relationship were all forgotten to-day in the excitement of a
show, in which mere cruelty to animals, their useless suffering and
death, formed [238] the main point of interest. People watched their
destruction, batch after batch, in a not particularly inventive
fashion; though it was expected that the animals themselves, as living
creatures are apt to do when hard put to it, would become inventive,
and make up, by the fantastic accidents of their agony, for the
deficiencies of an age fallen behind in this matter of manly amusement.
It was as a Deity of Slaughter--the Taurian goddess who demands the
sacrifice of the shipwrecked sailors thrown on her coasts--the cruel,
moonstruck huntress, who brings not only sudden death, but rabies,
among the wild creatures that Diana was to be presented, in the person
of a famous courtesan.  The aim at an actual theatrical illusion, after
the first introductory scene, was frankly surrendered to the display of
the animals, artificially stimulated and maddened to attack each other.
And as Diana was also a special protectress of new-born creatures,
there would be a certain curious interest in the dexterously contrived
escape of the young from their mother's torn bosoms; as many pregnant
animals as possible being carefully selected for the purpose.

The time had been, and was to come again, when the pleasures of the
amphitheatre centered in a similar practical joking upon human beings.
What more ingenious diversion had stage manager ever contrived than
that incident, itself a practical epigram never to be forgottten, [239]
when a criminal, who, like slaves and animals, had no rights, was
compelled to present the part of Icarus; and, the wings failing him in
due course, had fallen into a pack of hungry bears?  For the long shows
of the amphitheatre were, so to speak, the novel-reading of that age--a
current help provided for sluggish imaginations, in regard, for
instance, to grisly accidents, such as might happen to one's self; but
with every facility for comfortable inspection.  Scaevola might watch
his own hand, consuming, crackling, in the fire, in the person of a
culprit, willing to redeem his life by an act so delightful to the
eyes, the very ears, of a curious public.  If the part of Marsyas was
called for, there was a criminal condemned to lose his skin.  It might
be almost edifying to study minutely the expression of his face, while
the assistants corded and pegged him to the bench, cunningly; the
servant of the law waiting by, who, after one short cut with his knife,
would slip the man's leg from his skin, as neatly as if it were a
stocking--a finesse in providing the due amount of suffering for
wrong-doers only brought to its height in Nero's living bonfires.  But
then, by making his suffering ridiculous, you enlist against the
sufferer, some real, and all would-be manliness, and do much to stifle
any false sentiment of compassion.  The philosophic emperor, having no
great taste for sport, and asserting here a personal scruple, had
greatly changed all [240] that; had provided that nets should be spread
under the dancers on the tight-rope, and buttons for the swords of the
gladiators.  But the gladiators were still there.  Their bloody
contests had, under the form of a popular amusement, the efficacy of a
human sacrifice; as, indeed, the whole system of the public shows was
understood to possess a religious import.  Just at this point,
certainly, the judgment of Lucretius on pagan religion is without
reproach--

     Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.

And Marius, weary and indignant, feeling isolated in the great
slaughter-house, could not but observe that, in his habitual
complaisance to Lucius Verus, who, with loud shouts of applause from
time to time, lounged beside him, Aurelius had sat impassibly through
all the hours Marius himself had remained there.  For the most part
indeed, the emperor had actually averted his eyes from the show,
reading, or writing on matters of public business, but had seemed,
after all, indifferent.  He was revolving, perhaps, that old Stoic
paradox of the Imperceptibility of pain; which might serve as an
excuse, should those savage popular humours ever again turn against men
and women.  Marius remembered well his very attitude and expression on
this day, when, a few years later, certain things came to pass in Gaul,
under his full authority; and that attitude and expression [241]
defined already, even thus early in their so friendly intercourse, and
though he was still full of gratitude for his interest, a permanent
point of difference between the emperor and himself--between himself,
with all the convictions of his life taking centre to-day in his
merciful, angry heart, and Aurelius, as representing all the light, all
the apprehensive power there might be in pagan intellect.  There was
something in a tolerance such as this, in the bare fact that he could
sit patiently through a scene like this, which seemed to Marius to mark
Aurelius as his inferior now and for ever on the question of
righteousness; to set them on opposite sides, in some great conflict,
of which that difference was but a single presentment.  Due, in
whatever proportions, to the abstract principles he had formulated for
himself, or in spite of them, there was the loyal conscience within
him, deciding, judging himself and every one else, with a wonderful
sort of authority:--You ought, methinks, to be something quite
different from what you are; here! and here!  Surely Aurelius must be
lacking in that decisive conscience at first sight, of the intimations
of which Marius could entertain no doubt--which he looked for in
others.  He at least, the humble follower of the bodily eye, was aware
of a crisis in life, in this brief, obscure existence, a fierce
opposition of real good and real evil around him, the issues of which
he must by no [242] means compromise or confuse; of the antagonisms of
which the "wise" Marcus Aurelius was unaware.

That long chapter of the cruelty of the Roman public shows may,
perhaps, leave with the children of the modern world a feeling of
self-complacency.  Yet it might seem well to ask ourselves--it is
always well to do so, when we read of the slave-trade, for instance, or
of great religious persecutions on this side or on that, or of anything
else which raises in us the question, "Is thy servant a dog, that he
should do this thing?"--not merely, what germs of feeling we may
entertain which, under fitting circumstances, would induce us to the
like; but, even more practically, what thoughts, what sort of
considerations, may be actually present to our minds such as might have
furnished us, living in another age, and in the midst of those legal
crimes, with plausible excuses for them: each age in turn, perhaps,
having its own peculiar point of blindness, with its consequent
peculiar sin--the touch-stone of an unfailing conscience in the select
few.

Those cruel amusements were, certainly, the sin of blindness, of
deadness and stupidity, in the age of Marius; and his light had not
failed him regarding it.  Yes! what was needed was the heart that would
make it impossible to witness all this; and the future would be with
the forces that could beget a heart like that. [243] His chosen
philosophy had said,--Trust the eye: Strive to be right always in
regard to the concrete experience: Beware of falsifying your
impressions. And its sanction had at least been effective here, in
protesting--"This, and this, is what you may not look upon!"  Surely
evil was a real thing, and the wise man wanting in the sense of it,
where, not to have been, by instinctive election, on the right side,
was to have failed in life.



END OF VOL. I










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Marius the Epicurean, Volume One, by
Walter Horatio Pater

