a look of faded gentility.

"Mr. Walton," said the visitor, with some hesitation.

"That is my name.  Won't you take a seat?"

The visitor sat down, but appeared ill at ease.  He nervously fumbled
at his hat, and did not speak.

"Can I do anything for you?" asked Harry, at length.

"I see you don't know me," said the stranger.

"I can't say I recall your features; but then I see a great many
persons."

"I went to school at the Prescott Academy, when you were in the
office of the Centreville 'Gazette.'"

Harry looked more closely, and exclaimed, in astonished recognition,
"Fitzgerald Fletcher!"

"Yes," said the other, flushing with mortification, "I am Fitzgerald
Fletcher."

"I am glad to see you," said Harry, cordially, forgetting the old
antagonism that had existed between them.

He rose and offered his hand, which Fletcher took with an air of
relief, for he had felt uncertain of his reception.

"You have prospered wonderfully," said Fletcher, with a shade of envy.

"Yes," said Harry, smiling.  "I was a printer's devil when you knew
me; but I never meant to stay in that position.  I have risen from
the ranks."

"I haven't," said Fletcher, bitterly.

"Have you been unfortunate?  Tell me about it, if you don't mind,"
said Harry, sympathetically.

"My father failed three years ago," said Fletcher, "and I found
myself adrift with nothing to do, and no money to fall back upon.  I
have drifted about since then; but now I am out of employment.  I
came to you to-day to see if you will exert your influence to get me
a government clerkship, even of the lowest class.  You may rest
assured, Mr. Walton, that I need it."

Was this the proud Fitzgerald Fletcher, suing, for the means of
supporting himself, to one whom, as a boy, he had despised and looked
down upon?  Surely, the world is full of strange changes and
mutations of fortune.  Here was a chance for Harry to triumph over
his old enemy; but he never thought of doing it.  Instead, he was
filled with sympathy for one who, unlike himself, had gone down in
the social scale, and he cordially promised to see what he could do
for Fletcher, and that without delay.

On inquiry, he found that Fletcher was qualified to discharge the
duties of a clerk, and secured his appointment to a clerkship in the
Treasury Department, on a salary of twelve hundred dollars a year.
It was an income which Fletcher would once have regarded as wholly
insufficient for his needs; but adversity had made him humble, and he
thankfully accepted it.  He holds the position still, discharging the
duties satisfactorily.  He is glad to claim the Hon. Harry Walton
among his acquaintances, and never sneers at him now as a "printer's
devil."

Oscar Vincent spent several years abroad, after graduation, acting as
foreign correspondent of his father's paper.  He is now his father's
junior partner, and is not only respected for his ability, but a
general favorite in society, on account of his sunny disposition and
cordial good nature.  He keeps up his intimacy with Harry Walton.
Indeed, there is good reason for this, since Harry, four years since,
married his sister Maud, and the two friends are brothers-in-law.

Harry's parents are still living, no longer weighed down by poverty,
as when we first made their acquaintance.  The legacy which came so
opportunely improved their condition, and provided them with comforts
to which they had long been strangers.  But their chief satisfaction
comes from Harry's unlooked-for success in life.  Their past life of
poverty and privation is all forgotten in their gratitude for this
great happiness.



The next and concluding volume of this series will be

  HERBERT CARTER'S LEGACY.





End of Project Gutenberg's Risen from the Ranks, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

