remained where they had been left, silent and motionless.

Henry, as was natural, was in front, and he was the first to see the
object that had caused the noise. A man stepped from the shelter of a
tree's great trunk, and, although armed, he held up one hand, in the
manner of a friend. He was an Indian of middle age and dignified look,
although he was not painted like any of the tribes that came down to
make war in Kentucky.

Henry recognized at once the friendly signal, and he too stepped from
the cover of the forest, walking slowly toward the warrior, who was
undoubtedly a chief and a man of importance. Twenty feet away, the boy
started a little, and a sudden light leaped into his eyes. Then he
strode up rapidly, and took the warrior's hand after the white custom.

"Black Cloud! My friend!" he said.

"You know me! You have not forgotten?" replied the chief and his eyes
gleamed ever so quickly.

"You have come far from your people and among hostile tribes to see me?"
said Henry who instantly divined the truth.

"It is so," replied the chief, "and to ask you to go back with me. Our
warriors miss you."

Henry was moved to the depths of his nature. Black Cloud had come a
thousand miles to ask him this question, and he had a far, sweet vision
of a life utterly wild and free. Again he saw the great plains, and
again came to his ears, like rolling thunder, the tread of the
myriad-footed buffalo herd. He was tempted sorely tempted and he knew
it, but, with a mighty effort he put the temptation away from him and
shook his head.

"It cannot be, Black Cloud," he said. "My people need me, as yours need
you."

A shadow passed over the eyes of the chief, but it was gone in a moment.
He knew that the answer was final, and he said not another word on the
subject.

Black Cloud went on with Henry and Paul half a day, then he bade them
farewell. They watched him go, but it could be only for a minute or two,
because his form quickly melted away into the forest. Then the two boys,
turning their faces steadily toward duty, marched on, and the great
wilderness, gleaming in its reds and yellows and browns curved about
them.



