companions with him. He never showed himself at his aunt's door again.

"And we are well rid of him," said Marion. "He is as cowardly as he is
unprincipled."

On the day following Jack's return home there was a long-drawn battle in
the mountains between the Federal troops and the guerrillas, which
resulted in the killing off of a number of the outlaws, including those
who had held our hero a prisoner. In this contest Gendron was also
killed, and he died without revealing what he knew of Dr. Mackey's past.

The outlaws' camp was thoroughly searched, and here were found the goods
stolen from the trader who had been attacked in the storm, and also a
number of other things of value, including the tin box taken from the
wreck of the _Nautilus_. Later on this box, with its contents, was
turned over to Colonel Stanton.

"My precious papers!" said the officer to Jack, as he looked them over.
"My son, nothing now stands between us and our fortune."

A few words more and we will bring this tale to a close.

Colonel Stanton's recovery was slow, and by the time he got around again
the great Civil War was a thing of the past. For this the colonel was
truly thankful, and so were Jack, Mrs. Ruthven, and Marion.

As soon as it was possible to do so, the colonel resigned from the army.
This done, he set to work to prosecute Dr. Mackey and recover the
fortune due himself and Jack. As a result of these movements Dr. Mackey
received a term of ten years in prison, and inside of a year the
Stantons, father and son, came into possession of a fortune worth a
hundred and fifteen thousand dollars.

Colonel Stanton had thought at first to go back to the North and settle
down, but Mrs. Ruthven hated to part with Jack, and it was decided that
all should remain at the plantation. A year later the colonel married
the widow, so that Mrs. Ruthven, now Mrs. Stanton, became once more
Jack's mother.

"And that is just what I wanted," said Jack, after the wedding.

The ceremony at the plantation was a double one, for at the time Mrs.
Ruthven married the colonel Marion gave her heart into the keeping of
Dr. Harry Powell, who had now set up a lucrative practice for himself in
Philadelphia. The double wedding was a grand affair, and was the talk of
the neighborhood for a long time afterward. The Ruthvens from the other
plantation were invited, but while Mrs. Mary Ruthven came, St. John was
conspicuous by his absence.

St. John was now a worse spendthrift than ever, and it was not long
before the plantation went under the hammer, and Mrs. Mary Ruthven was
compelled to live upon her sister-in-law's charity. St. John drifted to
New Orleans and finally to the West, and that was the last heard of him.
Let us trust that he saw the error of his ways and turned over a new
leaf.

As for Jack, he proved to be indeed the son of a soldier, for some years
later he entered West Point Military Academy, and graduated with high
honors. From the Academy he, too, went West, but as an officer at one of
the well-known forts. His career here was full of daring and honor, and
he speedily rose to the position of colonel, which he filled with all of
his old-time bravery and loyalty.



