connected with Time; and he who would do his duty well, and enjoy the
greatest possible amount of happiness here, must seek to prepare himself
for _every_ change.  Men cannot escape the general law.  The current of
their particular stream may long run smooth, but, sooner or later, the
rugged channel and the precipice will come.  Some streams run quietly
for many a league, and only at the last are troubled.  Others burst from
their very birth on rocks of difficulty, and rush throughout their
course in tortuous, broken channels.

So was it with the actors in our story.  Our hero's course was smooth.
Having fallen in love with his friend Tom Singleton's profession, he
studied medicine and surgery, became an M.D., and returned to practise
in Grayton, which was a flourishing sea-port, and, during the course of
Fred's career, extended considerably.  Fred also fell in love with a
pretty young girl in a neighbouring town, and married her.  Tom
Singleton also took up his abode in Grayton, there being, as he said,
"room for two".  Ever since Tom had seen Isobel on the end of the quay,
on the day when the _Dolphin_ set sail for the Polar regions, his heart
had been taken prisoner.  Isobel refused to give it back unless he, Tom,
should return the heart which he had stolen from her.  This he could not
do, so it was agreed that the two hearts should be tied together, and
they two should be constituted joint guardians of both.  In short, they
were married, and took Mrs Bright to live with them, not far from the
residence of old Mr Singleton, who was the fattest and jolliest old
gentleman in the place, and the very idol of dogs and boys, who loved
him to distraction.

Captain Ellice, having had, as he said, "more than his share of the
sea," resolved to live on shore, and, being possessed of a moderately
comfortable income, he purchased Mrs Bright's cottage on the green hill
that overlooked the harbour and the sea.  Here he became celebrated for
his benevolence, and for the energy with which he entered into all the
schemes that were devised for the benefit of the town of Grayton.  Like
Tom Singleton and Fred, he became deeply interested in the condition of
the poor, and had a special weakness for _poor old women_, which he
exhibited by searching up, and doing good to, every poor old woman in
the parish.  Captain Ellice was also celebrated for his garden, which
was a remarkably fine one; for his flag-staff, which was a remarkably
tall and magnificent one; and for his telescope, which constantly
protruded from his drawing-room window, and pointed in the direction of
the sea.

As for the others--Captain Guy continued his career at sea, as commander
of an East Indiaman.  He remained stout and true-hearted to the last,
like one of the oak timbers of his own good ship.

Bolton, Saunders, Mivins, Peter Grim, Amos Parr, and the rest of them,
were scattered in a few years, as sailors usually are, to the four
quarters of the globe.  O'Riley alone was heard of again.  He wrote to
Buzzby, "by manes of the ritin' he had larn'd aboord the _Dolfin_,"
informing him that he had forsaken the "say" and become a small farmer
near Cork.  He had plenty of murphies and also a pig--the latter
"bein'," he said, "so like the wan that belonged to his owld grandmother
that he thought it must be the same wan comed alive agin, or its
darter."

And Buzzby--poor Buzzby--he, also, gave up the sea, much against his
will, by command of his wife, and took to miscellaneous work, of which
there was plenty for an active man in a seaport like Grayton.  His
rudder, poor man, was again (and this time permanently) lashed
amidships, and whatever breeze Mrs Buzzby chanced to blow, his business
was to sail _right before it_.  The two little Buzzbys were the joy of
their father's heart.  They were genuine little true-blues, both of
them, and went to sea the moment their legs were long enough, and came
home, voyage after voyage, with gifts of curiosities and gifts of money
to their worthy parents.

Dumps resided during the remainder of his days with Captain Ellice, and
Poker dwelt with Buzzby.  These truly remarkable dogs kept up their
attachment to each other to the end.  Indeed, as time passed by, they
drew closer and closer together, for Poker became more sedate, and,
consequently, a more suitable companion for his ancient friend.  The
dogs formed a connecting-link between the Buzzby and Ellice families--
constantly reminding each of the other's existence, by the daily
interchange of visits.

Fred and Tom soon came to be known as skilful doctors.  Together they
went through life respected by all who knew them--each year as it passed
cementing closer and closer that undying friendship which had first
started into being in the gay season of boyhood, and had bloomed and
ripened amid the adventures, dangers, and vicissitudes of the World of
Ice.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The World of Ice, by R.M. Ballantyne

