
"Events have proved you did. Poor Cork! Still, Corks float, you know,
and he has. He isn't dead yet by any means," jested Hal. "In fact, he
told me only a day or two ago that he liked his new job much better
than he did the old one so I guess nobody need waste pity on him."

"I'm afraid he wasn't punished much, after all," sniffed Mrs. McGregor.

"Oh, he's had it borne in upon him that he was a brute, Ma; don't you
fret," declared Carl. "Mr. Coulter never does things by halves. When he
starts in he finishes up a job in bang-up style. Corcoran's learned his
lesson; and if he has that is all that is necessary."

A clock struck softly.

"Hal Harling! Do you realize it is twelve o'clock?" Louise exclaimed in
dismay. "We must go home this minute. The very idea of our staying here
and keeping the McGregors up until this hour! I'd no idea it was so
late. Why, you may be robbed of your precious Corcoran watch if you
don't hurry home out of the lonely streets. Good-night, everybody! And
blessings on you, Carlie! You've been a trump. I'm going to begin
to-morrow and work harder than ever for Mr. John Coulter."

"Here's to him!" Carl began. But a restraining hand was clapped over
his mouth.

"Carl! Carl! For mercy's sake, remember that it's twelve o'clock and
everybody's abed and asleep. Don't go cheering for Mr. Coulter now. You
can go out in the field and do it to-morrow."

"I'm afraid I'll be too busy to-morrow."

"And what'll you be doing to-morrow, pray, that's of so much
importance?"

"Why, I'll have to be deciding whether I want to go to college, or go
to sea with Uncle Frederick; or go into Mr. Coulter's mills," was the
teasing answer. "I seem to have three careers open to me. Maybe I'll
have to toss up a penny to find out which I'd better take. Will you
lend me the penny, Ma?"

"Indeed I won't," snapped his mother wrathfully. "Three careers! Humph!
Still I'm not saying that if you could go into the mills with Mr.
Coulter to stand behind you you might not make your fortune. But
there's time enough to decide that later. We needn't argue it at
twelve o'clock at night."



