took refuge on an island in the Colne. The Saxons besieged them there;
but when the Danes were about to surrender from want of provisions the
news arrived that the Northmen of Northumbria and East Anglia, with 240
ships, had landed suddenly in Devonshire, and had laid siege to Exeter.

The siege of the island was at once raised, and King Alfred marched
against the new arrivals, and advancing with great speed fell upon them
and defeated them. Then hastily returning he came to London and, joined
by a strong force from Mercia, marched against Milton, where Hasting
had been joined by the great number of the Danes who had formed the
army in the Weald. Hasting himself was away, but his army marched out
to meet the Saxons.

A great battle was fought, but the Danes could not resist the ardour of
their assailants. Their army was routed and their fortress stormed. All
the booty within it fell into the hands of the victors, together with
the wives and families of the Danes, among whom were the wife and two
sons of Hasting. The Danish fleet also was captured, and was burned or
taken to London. Another great fleet of the East Angles and
Northumbrians sailed up the Thames, and landing, the Northmen marched
across to the Severn, but were defeated and destroyed by Ethelred of
Mercia.

Exeter was again invested by a Danish fleet, and again saved by Alfred.
The Danes, as they retired along the south coast, landed near
Chichester, where they suffered a heavy defeat from the South Saxons.

In the following year a fresh fleet sailed up the Thames and thence up
the Lea, where they constructed a fortress twenty miles above London.

Alfred caused two fortresses to be erected on the Lea below them, with
vast balks of timber entirely obstructing the river. The Danes, finding
their retreat cut off, abandoned their ships and marched across England
to Cwatbridge on the Severn. Their fleet fell into the hands of the
Londoners, who burned and broke up all the smaller ships and carried
the rest down to London. The Danes were so disconcerted by the many and
severe defeats which had befallen them that they now abandoned the idea
of again conquering England, and taking ship, sailed for France.

Four years later, in 901, King Alfred died, having reigned twenty-nine
years and six months. During his reign England had made immense
advances in civilization, and in spite of the devastation wrought by
the Danish occupation of Wessex during the early years of his reign,
and the efforts required afterwards to oppose them, the wealth and
prosperity of the country vastly increased during his reign. Abbeys and
monasteries had multiplied, public buildings been erected, towns
rebuilt and beautified, and learning had made great advances. The laws
of the country had been codified and regulated, the administration of
justice placed on a firm basis. The kingly authority had greatly
increased, and the great ealdormen were no longer semi-independent
nobles, but officers of the crown. Serfdom, although not entirely
abolished, had been mitigated and regulated. Arts and manufactures had
made great progress.

Edmund and Freda survived King Alfred many years, and their district
continued to be one of the most prosperous and well-ruled in the
kingdom. Their descendants continued to hold the office of ealdorman
until the invasion by William the Conqueror, and the holder of the
office at that time fell, with numbers of his followers, at the battle
of Hastings. For very many years after that event the prow of the
Dragon was kept in the great hall of Sherborne as a memorial of the
valiant deeds performed against the Danes by Ealdorman Edmund.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dragon and the Raven, by G. A. Henty

