"but he didn't look happy when he did so. I shouldn't wonder if he
accepted our terms, now that he knows we needn't sell."

Herbert proved to be right. Two days later the squire offered six
hundred dollars over the mortgage for the place, and it was accepted.

"The place is worth more, mother," he said; "but it will relieve us from
care to sell it."

James was even more annoyed than his father when he heard of Herbert's
good fortune; but after his first annoyance he showed a disposition to
be friendly. It is the way of the world. Nothing makes us sought after
like a little good fortune. James felt that, now Herbert was in a
position to live without work, he was a gentleman, and to be treated
accordingly. Herbert received his overtures politely, but rated them at
their real value.

Two years slipped away.

Herbert has finished his course at the academy, and is about to enter
the manufactory as an office clerk. Mr. Cameron means to promote him
as he merits, and I should not be at all surprised if our young friend
eventually became junior partner. He and his mother have bought the
house into which they moved, and have done not a little to convert it
into a tasteful home. The invention has proved all that Mr. Cameron
hoped for it. It has been widely introduced, and Herbert realizes as
much from his own half as Mr. Cameron agreed to pay for that which he
purchased. So his father's invention has proved to be Herbert Carter's
most valuable legacy.

Squire Leech has been unfortunate. Too late he found, that Andrew Temple
had deceived and defrauded him. All his large property, except a few
thousand dollars, has been swept away, and James, disappointed in his
lofty hopes, last week applied to Herbert to use his influence to obtain
him a situation in Mr. Cameron's establishment. There was no vacancy
there, but our hero has found him a place in a dry-goods store in
the same town. Whether he will keep it remains to be seen. Times have
changed since James looked upon Herbert as far beneath him. Now he
is glad to be acknowledged as his companion. If James profits by his
altered circumstances, the loss of his father's property may not prove
so much of a misfortune after all, for wealth is far from being the
greatest earthly good. For our young friend Herbert we may confidently
indulge in cheerful anticipations. He has undergone the discipline of
poverty and privation, and prosperity is not likely to spoil him. He
has done his duty under difficult circumstances, and now he reaps the
reward.


THE END








End of Project Gutenberg's Herbert Carter's Legacy, by Horatio Alger

