scholar was born in Charleston, S.C. He graduated at Yale College
in 1807. He gained considerable reputation as a politician, but is
best known as an advocate of peace, Sunday schools, and the
Bible. He was a man of deep feeling, earnest purpose, and pure
life.

1. There is a classic the best the world has ever seen, the noblest that
has ever honored and dignified the language of mortals. If we look into
its antiquity, we discover a title to our veneration unrivaled in the
history of literature. If we have respect to its evidences, they are found
in the testimony of miracle and prophecy; in the ministry of man, of
nature, and of angels, yea, even of "God, manifest in the flesh," of "God
blessed forever."

2. If we consider its authenticity, no other pages have survived the lapse
of time that can be compared with it. If we examine its authority, for it
speaks as never man spake, we discover that it came from heaven in vision
and prophecy under the sanction of Him who is Creator of all things, and
the Giver of every good and perfect gift.

3. If we reflect on its truths, they are lovely and spotless, sublime and
holy as God himself, unchangeable as his nature, durable as his righteous
dominion, and versatile as the moral condition of mankind. If we regard
the value of its treasures, we must estimate them, not like the relics of
classic antiquity, by the perishable glory and beauty, virtue and
happiness, of this world, but by the enduring perfection and supreme
felicity of an eternal kingdom.

4. If we inquire who are the men that have recorded its truths, vindicated
its rights, and illustrated the excellence of its scheme, from the depth
of ages and from the living world, from the populous continent and the
isles of the sea, comes forth the answer: "The patriarch and the prophet,
the evangelist and the martyr."

5. If we look abroad through the world of men, the victims of folly or
vice, the prey of cruelty, of injustice, and inquire what are its
benefits, even in this temporal state, the great and the humble, the rich
and the poor, the powerful and the weak, the learned and the ignorant
reply, as with one voice, that humility and resignation, purity, order,
and peace, faith, hope, and charity are its blessings upon earth.

6. And if, raising our eyes from time to eternity; from the world of
mortals to the world of just men made perfect; from the visible creation,
marvelous, beautiful, and glorious as it is, to the invisible creation of
angels and seraphs; from the footstool of God to the throne of God
himself, we ask, what are the blessings that flow from this single volume,
let the question be answered by the pen of the evangelist, the harp of the
prophet, and the records of the book of life.

7. Such is the best of classics the world has ever admired; such, the
noblest that man has ever adopted as a guide.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Clas'sic, a work of acknowledged excellence and
authority. 2. Au-then-tic'i-ty, of established authority for truth and
correctness. Sanc'tion (pro, sank'shun), authority, support. 3.
Ver'sa-tile, readily applied to various subjects. 4. Vin di-cat-ed,
defended, justified. E-van'gel-ist, a writer of the history of Jesus
Christ. 6. Ser'aph, an angel of the highest order.



CXVII. MY MOTHER'S BIBLE.

George P. Morris (b. 1802, d. 1864) was born in Philadelphia. In 1823 he
became one of the editors of the "New York Mirror," a weekly literary
paper, In 1846 Mr. Morris and N. P. Willis founded "The Home Journal." He
was associate editor of this popular journal until a short time before his
death.

1. This book is all that's left me now,--
     Tears will unbidden start,--
   With faltering lip and throbbing brow
     I press it to my heart.
   For many generations past
     Here is our family tree;
   My mother's hands this Bible clasped,
     She, dying, gave it me.

2. Ah! well do I remember those
     Whose names these records bear;
   Who round the hearthstone used to close,
     After the evening prayer,
   And speak of what these pages said
     In tones my heart would thrill!
   Though they are with the silent dead,
     Here are they living still!

3. My father read this holy hook
     To brothers, sisters, dear;
   How calm was my poor mother's look,
     Who loved God's word to hear!
   Her angel face,--I see it yet!
     What thronging memories come!
   Again that little group is met
     Within the walls of home!

4. Thou truest friend man ever knew,
     Thy constancy I've tried;
   When all were false, I found thee true,
     My counselor and guide.
   The mines of earth no treasures give
     That could this volume buy;
   In teaching me the way to live,
     It taught me how to die.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of McGuffey's Fifth Eclectic Reader
by William Holmes McGuffey

