mourning, standing on the steps. He looked at her for a moment in
surprise, and then exclaimed:

"It is Annie Mansfield!"

Annie held out her hand, and laughed.

"We are both changed almost beyond recognition, Dick."

Then she added, demurely, "The last time, I had to ask you--"

"You sha'n't have to ask me again, Annie," he said, giving her a
hearty kiss. "My first impulse was to do it, but I did not know
whether your sentiments on the subject had changed."

"I am not given to change," she said.

"Am I, Mrs. Holland?"

"I don't think you are, my dear. I think there is a little spice of
obstinacy in your composition.

"But come in, Dick. Don't let us stand talking here at the door, when
we have so much to say to each other."

He went into the sitting room with his father and mother, where Annie
presently left them to themselves.

"Why, Father, the privateers must have done well, indeed!" Dick said,
looking round the handsome room.

"I have nothing to grumble at, on that score, Dick, though they have
not been so lucky the last two years. But it is not their profits that
induced us to move here. You saw Annie was in mourning. Her father
died, nearly a year ago, and at her earnest request, as he said in his
will, appointed us her guardians until she came of age, which will be
in a few months now. As he had no near relations, he left the whole of
his property to her; and having been in India in the days when, under
Warren Hastings, there were good pickings to be obtained, it amounted
to a handsome fortune. She said that she should come and live with us,
at any rate until she became of age; and as that house of ours, though
a comfortable place, was hardly the sort of house for an heiress, she
herself proposed that we should take a larger house between us.

"And so, here we are. We shall stay here through the winter, and then
we are going down to her place at Plymouth for the summer. What we
shall do, afterwards, is not settled. That must depend upon a variety
of things."

"She has grown much prettier than I ever thought she would do," Dick
said. "Of course, I knew she would have grown into a woman, but
somehow I never realised it, until I saw her, and I believe I have
always thought of her as being still the girl I carried off from
Seringapatam."

In a few minutes Annie joined them, and the talk then turned upon
India, and many questions were asked as to their friends at Tripataly.

"I suppose by this time, Annie--at least, I hope I may still call you
Annie?"

"If you call me anything else, I shall not answer," she said
indignantly.

"Well, I was going to say, I suppose you have got a good deal beyond
words of two letters, now?"

"I regard the question as an impertinent one. I have even mastered
geography; the meaning of which word you may remember, you explained
to me; and I have a partial knowledge of history."

The next day Dick met an old friend, Ben Birket. Dick had kept his
promise, and had written to him as soon as he returned to Tripataly
with his father, and a few weeks after Captain Holland's return, his
old shipmate came to see him and his wife. Ben had for some time
thought of retiring, and he now left the sea, and settled down in a
little cottage near. Captain Holland insisted upon settling a small
pension upon him, and he was always a welcome guest at the house. His
delight at Dick's return was extreme.

"I never thought you would do it, Master Dick, never for a moment, and
when on coming home I got your letter, and found that the Captain and
your mother were in England, it just knocked me foolish for a bit."

Three weeks later, Dick told Annie that he loved her. He spoke without
any circumlocution, merely taking her hand one evening, when they
happened to be alone together, and telling her so in plain words.

"I know nothing of women, Annie," he said, "or their ways. I have been
bothering myself how to set about it, but though I don't know how to
put it, I do know that I love you dearly. All these years I have been
thinking about you--not like this, you know, but as the dear, plucky
little girl of the old days."

"The little girl of old days, Dick," she said quietly, "is in no way
changed. I think you know what I thought of you, then. I have never
for a moment wavered. I gave you all the love of my heart, and you
have had it ever since.

"Why, you silly boy," she said, with a laugh, a few minutes later, "I
had begun to think that, just as I had to ask you for a kiss in the
old times, and again when you met me, I should have to take this
matter in hand. Why, I never thought of anything else. Directly I got
old enough to look upon myself as a woman, and young men began to come
to the house, I said to my dear father:

"'It is of no use their coming here, Father. My mind has been made up
for years, and I shall never change.'

"He knew at once what I meant.

"'I don't blame you, my dear,' he said. 'Of course, you are young at
present, but he has won you fairly; and if he is at all like what you
make him out to be, I could not leave you in better hands. He will be
home in another three or four years, and I shall have the comfort of
having you with me, until then. But you must not make too sure of it.
He may fall in love out there. You know that there is plenty of
society at Madras.'

"I laughed at the idea.

"'All the pretty ones either come out to be married, or get engaged on
the voyage, or before they have been there a fortnight. I have no
fear, Father, of his falling in love out there, though I don't say he
might not when he gets home, for of course he thinks of me only as a
little girl.'

"'Well, my dear,' he said, 'we will get him, and his father and
mother, to come down as soon as he gets home. As you have made up your
mind about it, it is only right that you should have the first
chance.'

"It was not to be as he planned, Dick, but you see I have had the
first chance, and it is well it was so, for no one can say how matters
would have turned out, if I had not been on the spot. Do you know,
Dick, I felt that when you rescued me from slavery, you became somehow
straightway my lord and master. As you carried me that night before
you, I said to myself I should always be your little slave; and you
see, it has come quite true."

"I don't know about that, Annie. We are in England now, and there are
no slaves. You will be the mistress now, and I your devoted servant."

"It will be as I say, Dick," she said tenderly. "I feel that, to the
end of my life, I shall remain your willing slave."

There was nothing to prevent an early marriage. It was settled that
Captain and Mrs. Holland should retain the house, which indeed they
could well afford to do, and that Dick and Annie should reside there
whenever they were in town, but that, as a rule, they would live at
the estate her father had purchased, near Plymouth. Their means were
ample, for during the eight years he was in the Service, Dick's 12,000
pounds had, as his father had predicted, doubled itself; and Annie's
fortune was at least as large as his own.

Dick had good reason to bless, to the end of his life, his mother's
plan; that had resulted in the double satisfaction of restoring his
father to her, and in winning for himself the woman whom he ever
regarded as the dearest and best wife in the world.



