children of several of the high Egyptian officials."

"How long is it since you lost her?"

"More than three years ago. At her death, I was fortunate enough to
obtain an appointment similar to that my father had, and at the same
time a commission in the Egyptian service; and have been fortunate in
being, two or three times, mentioned in despatches."

"Yes; curiously enough, after receiving Mr. Tufton's letter, we saw
Colonel Wingate's despatch in the paper, in which your name is
mentioned. We should have been astonished, indeed, had we not opened
the letter before we looked at the paper.

"Well, Gregory, we are very glad to see you, and to find that you have
done honour to the name. The despatch said that you have been
previously mentioned, under the name of Gregory Hilliard. We always
file our papers, and we spent an hour after breakfast in going through
them. I suppose you threw up your appointment, as soon as you
discovered that Geoffrey died, years ago, and that you had come into
the title?"

"I should have thrown it up, but Lord Kitchener was good enough to give
me six months' leave; so that, if I should fail to prove my right to
the title, I could return there and take up my work again. He was so
kind as to say that I should be given a responsible position, in the
civil administration of the Soudan."

"Well, we both feel very proud of you; and it does sound wonderful
that, being under twenty, you should have got on so well, without
friends or influence. I hope you intend to stay with us, until you have
to go up to London about these affairs."

"I shall be very happy to stay a few days, Aunt; but it is better that
I should be on the spot, as there may be questions that have to be
answered, and signatures, and all sorts of things.

"I have brought my Arab servant down with me. He has been with me for
three years, and is most faithful and devoted; and moreover, he once
saved my life, at tremendous risk to himself."

"Oh, of course we can put him up! Can he speak English?"

"He speaks a little English, and is improving fast."

"Does he dress as a native?"

"No, Aunt. He would soon freeze to death, in his native garb. As soon
as I got down to Cairo with him, I put him into good European clothes.
He is a fine specimen of a Soudan Arab, but when he came to me he was
somewhat weakly; however, he soon got over that."

"Where is he, now?"

"He is with the trap, outside. I told him that he had better not come
in until I had seen you, for I thought that your domestics would not
know what to do with him, till they had your orders."

"You brought your portmanteau with you, I hope?"

"I have brought it, but not knowing whether it would be wanted; for I
did not know whether you would take sufficiently to me, to ask me to
stay."

"The idea of such a thing! You must have had a bad opinion of us."

"No, Aunt. I had the best of opinions. I am sure that my father would
not have written as he did to you, unless he had been very fond of you.
Still, as at present I am not proved to be your nephew, I thought that
you might not be disposed to ask me to stay.

"Now, with your permission, I will go and tell Zaki--that is the man's
name--to bring in my portmanteau. I can then send the trap back."

"Do you know, Gregory," one of his aunts said that evening; "even
putting aside the fact that you are our nephew, we are delighted that
the title and estates are not to go to the next heir. He came down here
about a year ago. His regiment had just returned from the Soudan. He
drove straight to the hall, and requested to be shown over it, saying
that in a short time he was going to take possession. The housekeeper
came across here, quite in distress, and said that he talked as if he
were already master; said he should make alterations in one place,
enlarge the drawing room, build a conservatory against it, do away with
some of the pictures on the walls; and, in fact, he made himself very
objectionable. He came on here, and behaved in a most offensive and
ungentlemanly way. He actually enquired of us whether we were tenants
by right, or merely on sufferance. I told him that, if he wanted to
know, he had better enquire of Mr. Tufton; and Flossie, who is more
outspoken than I am, said at once that whether we were tenants for
life, or not, we should certainly not continue to reside here, if so
objectionable a person were master at the hall. He was very angry, but
I cut him short by saying:

"'This is our house at present, sir; and, unless you leave it at once,
I shall call the gardener in and order him to eject you.'"

"I am not surprised at what you say, Aunt, for I met the fellow myself,
on the way up to Omdurman; and found him an offensive cad. It has been
a great satisfaction to me to know that he was so; for if he had been a
nice fellow, I could not have helped being sorry to deprive him of the
title and estates which he has, for years, considered to be his."

After remaining four days at the Manor House, Gregory went back to
town. A notice had already been served, upon the former claimant to the
title, that an application would be made to the court to hear the claim
of Gregory Hilliard Hartley, nephew of the late Marquis, to be
acknowledged as his successor to the title and estates; and that if he
wished to appear by counsel, he could do so.

The matter was not heard of, for another three months. Lieutenant
Hartley was in court, and was represented by a queen's counsel of
eminence; who, however, when Gregory's narrative had been told, and the
various documents put in, at once stated that after the evidence he had
heard, he felt that it would be vain to contest the case at this point;
but that he reserved the right of appealing, should anything come to
light which would alter the complexion of the affair.

The judgment was that Gregory Hilliard Hartley had proved himself to be
the son of the late Gregory Hilliard Hartley, brother of and heir to
the late Marquis of Langdale, and was therefore seized of the title and
estates.

As soon as the case was decided, Gregory went down again to Devonshire,
and asked his aunts to take charge for him. This they at first said was
impossible; but he urged that, if they refused to do so, he should be
driven to go back to the Soudan again.

"My dear Aunts," he said, "what in the world am I to do? I know no one.
I know nothing of English customs, or society. I should, indeed, be the
most forlorn person in existence, with a large country estate and a
mansion in London. I want someone to introduce me into society, and set
me on my legs; manage me and my house, and preside at my table. I am
not yet twenty, and have not as much knowledge of English ways as a boy
of ten. I should be taken in and duped in every way, and be at the
mercy of every adventurer. I feel that it would be a sacrifice for you
to leave your pretty home here, but I am sure, for the sake of my
father, you will not refuse to do so."

His aunts admitted that there was great justice in what he said, and
finally submitted to his request to preside over his house; until, as
they said, the time came when he would introduce a younger mistress.

Zaki, when his six months' trial was over, scorned the idea of
returning to the Soudan; declaring that, if Gregory would not keep him,
he would rather beg in the streets than go back there.

"It is all wonderful here," he said; "we poor Arabs could not dream of
such things. No, Master, as long as you live, I shall stay here."

"Very well, Zaki, so be it; and I can promise you that if I die before
you, you will be so provided for that you will be able to live in as
much comfort as you now enjoy, and in addition you will be your own
master."

Zaki shook his head.

"I should be a fool to wish to be my own master," he said, "after
having such a good one, at present."

Gregory is learning the duties of a large land owner, and is already
very popular in his part of Devonshire. The mansion in London has not
yet been reopened, as Gregory says he must learn his lessons perfectly,
before he ventures to take his place in society.



