were launched at the Spaniards. Seized with panic, these at once
scattered and, the English falling upon them, a series of desperate
conflicts ensued, ending almost always in the capture or
destruction of the enemy.

The Duke of Medina-Sidonia, who commanded the main Spanish fleet,
sailed north, intending to coast round the north of Scotland and so
return to Spain. The English ships followed for a while, but were,
from the shortness of the supplies which had been placed on board,
forced to put into harbor; and a great storm scattering the Spanish
fleet, and wrecking many, only 60 vessels, and these with their
crews disabled by hardship and fatigue, ever returned to Spain.

As a consequence of their gallantry in these battles, and upon the
urgent recommendations of Sir Francis Drake, her majesty was
pleased to bestow the honor of knighthood upon each of the four
young Devonshire gentlemen, as upon many other brave captains.

After this they went no more to sea, nor took any part in the
disastrous expedition which Admirals Drake and Hawkins, together,
made to the Spanish Main, when the brave Sir Francis lost his life,
from fever and disappointment.

Soon after their return from the defeat of the armada, Sir Edward
Hearne married the only sister of his friend Gerald, and lived with
her happily to a green old age. The friendship between the four
friends never diminished, but rather increased as they grew in
years, and many marriages took place between their children and
grandchildren. Four times a year, upon the occasion of special
events in their lives, great family gatherings were held at the
house of one or other. Sir Gerald generally held festival on the
anniversary of the defeat of the Spanish attack on the forest
fortress in Porto Rico; Tom upon that of his escape from the prison
of the Inquisition; Reuben generally celebrated the day when, in
the character of a South Sea idol, he aided to defeat the hostile
islanders; while Ned kept up the anniversary of their return to
England. As to the victory over the armada, they always had to draw
lots as to the house in which that great event should be
celebrated.

Upon all these occasions stories were told at great length, and
their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, for all
lived to see these growing up, were never tired of listening to
tales of the Spanish Main.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Under Drake's Flag, by G. A. Henty

