accompanying them.

It was a day to be long remembered, in the glen, when Colonel
Drummond and his Saxon wife came to take possession of his father's
estates; where his mother had now been established for upwards of a
year, in the old mansion. It was late when they arrived. A body of
mounted men with torches met them, at the boundary of the estate;
and accompanied them to the house, where all the tenants and
clansmen were assembled. Great bonfires blazed, and scores of
torches added to the picturesque effect. A party of pipers struck
up an air of welcome as they drove forward, and a roar of cheering,
and shouts of welcome greeted them.

"Welcome to your Scottish home!" Fergus said to his wife. "'Tis a
poor place, in comparison with your father's, but nowhere in the
world will you find truer hearts and a warmer greeting than here."

His mother was standing on the steps as he leapt out, and she
embraced him with tears of joy; while after him she gave a warm and
affectionate greeting to Thirza. Then Fergus turned to the
clansmen, who stood thronging round the entrance, with waving
torches and bonnets thrown wildly in the air; and said a few words
of thanks for their welcome, and of the pleasure and pride he felt
in coming again among them, as the head of the clan and master of
his father's estates.

Then he presented Thirza to them as their mistress.

"She has brought me another home, across the sea," he said, "but
she will soon come to love this, as well as her own; and though I
shall be absent part of the time, she will come with me every
summer to stay among you, and will regard you as her people, as
well as mine."

Among the dependents ranged in the hall was Wulf, with whom Fergus
shook hands warmly.

"I should never have got on as well as I have, Wulf," he said, "had
it not been for your teaching, both in German and in arms. I
commend to your special care my servant Karl, who speaks no
English, and will feel strange here at first. He has been my
companion all this time, has given me most faithful service, and
has saved my life more than once. He has now left the army to
follow me."

Fergus remained three months at home. Thirza was delighted with the
country, and the affection shown by the people to Fergus; and
studied diligently to learn the language, that she might be able to
communicate personally with them, and above all with Mrs. Drummond,
to whom she speedily became much attached.

At the end of April they returned to Saxony, and took up their
abode on the estate the count had settled on them, at their
marriage.

For two years longer the war continued, but with much diminished
fury, and there was no great battle fought. The king planted
himself in a camp, which he rendered impregnable, and there
menacing the routes by which the Saxon and Russian armies brought
their supplies from Bohemia, paralysed their movements; while
General Platen made a raid into Poland, and destroyed a great
portion of the Russian magazines in that direction, so that the
campaign came to naught. Ferdinand, with the aid of his English,
defeated Broglio and Soubise at Villingshausen; Soubise remaining
inactive during the battle, as Broglio had done at Minden.

At the beginning of 1762 a happy event for the king took place. The
Empress of Russia died; and Peter, a great admirer of Frederick,
came to the throne. The Prussian king at once released all the
Russian prisoners, and sent them back; and Peter returned the
compliment by sending home the Prussian prisoners and, six weeks
after his accession, issued a declaration that there ought to be
peace with the King of Prussia, and that the czar was resolved that
the war should be ended. He at once gave up East Prussia and other
conquests, and recalled the Russian army. He not only did this, but
he ordered his General Czernichef to march and join the king.

The news caused absolute dismay in Austria, and hastened the Swedes
to conclude a peace with Frederick. They had throughout the war
done little, but the peace set free the force that had been
watching them; and which had regularly, every year, driven them
back as fast as they endeavoured to invade Prussia on that side.

In July, however, the murder of Peter threw all into confusion
again; but Catherine had no desire to renew the war, and it was
evident that this was approaching its end. She therefore recalled
her army, which had already joined that of the king. England and
France, too, were negotiating terms of peace; and it was clear that
Austria, single handed, could not hope to win back Silesia.

The king gained several small but important successes, and
recaptured the important fortress of Schweidnitz. Then came long
negotiations and, on the following February, a general peace was
signed by all the Powers; Prussia retaining her frontiers, as at
the beginning of the war.

From this time Fergus Drummond's life passed uneventfully. Every
year he went to his old home with his wife, and as time went on
brought his children to Scotland; and every winter he spent a
fortnight at Berlin. When his second son reached the age of twelve,
he sent him to school in England, and there prepared him to succeed
to the Scottish estate. This he did not do for many years, entering
the British army and winning the rank of colonel in the Peninsular
war; and it was not until some years after the battle of Waterloo
that, at the death of his father, he retired and settled down on
the Scottish estates that were now his.

The rest of Colonel Drummond's family took their mother's
nationality.

Fergus did not come in for the whole of the Eulenfurst estates,
until thirty years after his marriage. He then took up his abode,
with his wife, at the mansion where they had first met, near
Dresden; and retaining a sufficient share of the estates to support
his position, divided the remainder among his children, considering
that the property was too large to be owned with advantage by any
one person. His descendants are still large landowners in various
parts of Saxony.

The king survived the signature of the peace for twenty-five years,
during which he devoted himself to repairing the damage his country
had suffered by the war; and by incessant care, and wise reforms,
he succeeded in rendering Prussia far wealthier and more prosperous
than it had been when he succeeded to the throne. Lindsay rose to
the rank of general in the Prussian service, and his friendship
with Fergus remained close and unbroken. The old Earl Marischal
survived his younger brother for twenty years; and was, to the
last, one of the king's dearest and most intimate friends.



