deal of everything, and never was a more jovial meal.

Coote's cup seemed to be always on the road to or from the pot, and
Georgie was for ever mistaking the dish of tea-cake for his own private
plate; while Dick, bolder than any of them, insisted on giving his
parent ocular demonstration of the wholesomeness of each several dish,
until that good gentleman began to think it was a good thing he was not
a daily visitor at Templeton.

"Jolly brickish of old Cress, giving us his study, isn't it, you chaps?"

"Rather!" said Georgie.  "I think we might almost leave him out
something."

"I don't particularly want this _egg_," said Coote, who had already
accomplished two and was gently tapping a third, "if you think he'd like
that."

"How would it be to ask him in?  Would you mind, father?"

"Not at all," said Mr Richardson, really relieved at the prospect of a
fifth appetite to help off the banquet.

So Dick went in search of his senior, and found him in Freckleton's
study.  He felt constrained to invite both seniors to join their party,
and, somewhat to his alarm, they both accepted gladly.

Dick need not have been alarmed, though, for both the provisions and the
company held out wonderfully.

Mr Richardson was delighted with his boy's seniors, and they were no
less delighted with him.  The whole story of Tom White's boat was
rehearsed again, as were also the other stories of the term, finishing
up with the eventful assembly of the afternoon.

"It wasn't a pleasant affair at all," said Cresswell, "but thunderstorms
do clear the air sometimes, and I think Templeton understands itself
better now."

"Of course we shall have Pledge still," said Freckleton, "but, as long
as fellows know what he is, he's not dangerous.  It's when he gets hold
of young greenhorns like Heathcote and Coote he does mischief."

"He never got hold of me," said Coote.

"I was an ass to let him make a cad of me," said Heathcote.  "I had
warning, you know; the Ghost wrote to me before I'd been here a
fortnight."

"What Ghost?" asked Mr Richardson.

Cresswell laughed.

"Nobody knows," said he, "though some of us guess."

"Who?  Was it you?" asked Dick.  "I got a letter too, you know."

"No; it wasn't I."

"Then, by Jove! it must have been Freckleton," exclaimed Dick,
interpreting the guilty look on the Hermit's face.  "Was it, I say?"

"'_Dominat qui in se dominatur_'!" said the Hermit in a sepulchral tone.
"Yes, my boy; but keep it mum.  I shan't waste my Latin over you again
in a hurry."

"Your letter really made me sit up," said Dick, gravely.

"Well, I expect," said Cresswell, "if Templeton goes on as she's doing
now, the poor Ghost will be hard up for a job.  Mansfield is the right
man in the right place, and he's more right than ever now."

"That he is," said Freckleton, warmly.  "I can tell you fellows that, in
spite of his iron hand, he's one of the humblest fellows that ever
lived.  I believe he prays for Templeton night and morning, and that's
more than a lot of us do, I fear."

"After all," said Mr Richardson, "that's the best sort of Christian.  A
man who lives up to what he believes will lead fifty, where a man who
believes more than he acts up to will barely lead one."

"It strikes me," said Freckleton, "it's no joke to be a leader of men,
or boys either; is it, Dick?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Dick.  "It's no good as long as you don't go
quite straight yourself.  You've got to go square yourself, I suppose,
before any one else will back you up."

"Yes," said Coote; "we couldn't back you up, you know, while you were
going on as you were, could we, Dick?"

"Didn't look like it," said Dick, with a grin.

"But I expect Dick thinks it was worth his while to have to go steady,"
said Cresswell.  "It's done your 'Firm' no harm, has it?"

"Rather not!" said the "Firm," returning to their supper.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Follow My leader, by Talbot Baines Reed

