service of me country, and divil a girl has thrown herself upon me
neck. Here are you, a mere gossoon, fifteen years my junior in the
service, mentioned a score of times in despatches, promoted over my
head; and now you have won one of the prettiest creatures in
Ireland and, what is a good deal more to the point, though you may
not think of it at present, with a handsome fortune of her own. In
faith, there is no understanding the ways of Providence."

A week afterwards the whole party went up to Dublin, as Terence and
O'Grady had to go before a medical board. A fortnight later a
notice appeared, in the Gazette, that Lieutenant Colonel Terence
O'Connor had retired from the service, on half pay, with the rank
of colonel.

The marriage did not take place for another six months, by which
time Terence had thrown away his crutches and had taken to an
artificial leg--so well constructed that, were it not for a certain
stiffness in his walk, his loss would not have been suspected by a
casual observer. For three months previous to the event, a number
of men had been employed in building a small but pretty house, some
quarter of a mile from the mansion, intended for the occupation of
Majors O'Connor and O'Grady.

"It will be better, in every way, Terence," his father insisted,
when his son and Mary remonstrated against their thus proposing to
leave them. "O'Grady and I have been comrades for twenty years, and
we shall feel more at home, in bachelor quarters, than here. I can
run in three or four times a day, if I like, and I expect I shall
be as much here as over there; whereas if I lived here, I should
often be feeling myself in the way, though I know that you would
never say so. It is better for young people to be together and,
maybe some day, the house will be none too large for you."

The house was finished by the time the wedding took place, and the
two officers moved into it. The wedding was attended by all the
tenants, and half the country round; and it was agreed that the
bride's jewels were the most magnificent that had ever been seen in
that part of Ireland, though some objected that diamonds, alone,
would have been more suitable for the occasion than the emeralds.

Terence, on his return, had heard from his father that his Uncle,
Tim M'Manus, had called very soon after the major had returned to
his old home. He had been very friendly, and had been evidently
mollified by Terence's name appearing in general orders; but his
opinion that he would end his career by a rope had been in no way
shaken. He had, however, continued to pay occasional visits; and
the rapid rise of the scapegrace, and his frequent mention in
despatches, were evidently a source of much gratification to him;
and it was not long after his return that his uncle again came
over.

"We will let bygones be bygones, Terence," he said, as he shook
hands with him. "You have turned out a credit to your mother's
name, and I am proud of you; and I hold my head high when I say
Colonel Terence O'Connor, who was always playing mischief with the
French, is my great nephew, and the good M'Manus blood shines out
clearly in him."

There was no one who played a more conspicuous part at the wedding
than Uncle Tim. At his own request, he proposed the health of the
bride and bridegroom.

"I take no small credit to myself," he said, "that Colonel Terence
O'Connor is the hero of this occasion. Never was there a boy whose
destiny was so marked as his, and it is many a time I predicted
that it was not either by flood, or fire, or quietly in his bed
that he would die. If, when the regiment was ordered abroad, I had
offered him a home, I firmly believe that my prediction would be
verified before now; but I closed my doors to him, and the
consequence was that he expended his devilment upon the French; and
it is a deal better for him that it is only a leg that he has lost,
which is a much less serious matter than having his neck unduly
stretched. Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, I can say with pride
that I have had no small share in this matter, and it is glad I am
that, when I go, I can leave my money behind me, feeling that it
won't all go to the dogs before I have been twelve months in my
grave."

Another old friend was present at the wedding. Bull had made a slow
recovery, and had been some time before he regained his strength.
When he was gazetted out of the service, he secured a step in rank,
and retired as a major. In after years he made frequent visits to
Terence; to whom, as he always declared, he owed it that, instead
of being turned adrift on a nominal pension, he was now able to
live in comfort and ease.

When, four months later, Tim M'Manus was thrown out of his trap
when driving home late at night, and broke his neck, it was found
that he had left the whole of his property to Terence and, as the
rents of his estate amounted to 600 pounds a year, no inconsiderable
proportion of which had, for many years past, been accumulating, the
legacy placed Terence in a leading position among the gentry of Mayo.

For very many years the house was one of the most popular in the
county. It had been found necessary to make additions to it, and it
had now attained the dignity of a mansion. The three officers
followed, with the most intense interest, the bulletins and
despatches from the war and, on the day when the allies entered
Paris, the services of Tim Doolan, who had been invalided home a
year after the return of his master, and had been discharged as
unfit for further service, were called into requisition, for the
first time since his return, to assist his master back to the
house.

O'Grady, however, explained most earnestly to Mary O'Connor, the
next day, that it was not the whisky at all, at all, but his wooden
leg that had got out of order, and would not carry him straight.

Dick Ryan went through the war unscathed and, after Waterloo,
retired from the service with the rank of lieutenant colonel;
married, and settled at Athlone; and the closest intimacy, and very
frequent intercourse, were maintained between him and his comrades
of the Mayo Fusiliers.

Terence, in time, quite ceased to feel the loss of his leg; and was
able to join in all field sports, becoming in time master of the
hounds, and one of the most popular sportsmen in the county. His
wife always declared that his wound was the most fortunate thing
that ever happened to him for, had it not been for that, he would
most likely have fallen in some of the later battles in the
Peninsula.

"It is a good thing to have luck," she said, "and Terence had
plenty of it. But it does not do to tempt fortune too far. The
pitcher that goes too often to the well gets broken, in the end."





End of Project Gutenberg's Under Wellington's Command, by G. A. Henty

