that the figure I could make out, standing on the rail, was that of
a woman."

It was some little time before their plans were finally decided
upon. It was evident that, at present, no trade could be done in
French wines. However, as Jean, his mother, and his friend Flambard
had sufficient capital to enable them to live without trade, for
some time, they agreed that they should establish themselves at
once, in London, as wine merchants. Flambard had correspondents in
Spain and Portugal, from whom he could obtain wine of these
countries; and they agreed that Poole did not offer opportunities
for carrying on any considerable trade. Both insisted that Leigh
should become a member of the firm and, a month after their arrival
at Poole, the party moved up to London.

Madame Martin, her daughter, Jean and his wife took a house,
between them, at Hackney; and Monsieur Flambard and his wife
established themselves in another, a few hundred yards away.

From time to time came scraps of news from across the Channel. La
Rochejaquelein and Stofflet, after being separated from their
followers when crossing the Loire, had gathered a small band
together, and gained some successes over parties of the enemy. Two
grenadiers, after one of these skirmishes, were on the point of
being shot by the peasants when Henri came up to save their lives.
One of the prisoners, however, recognizing the gallant leader of
the Vendeans, raised his musket and shot him dead.

It was not for two years after this that the struggle was finally
brought to a conclusion, for the heroic people of La Vendee
continued to resist all the efforts of their enemies; until
Stofflet and Charette were captured and executed, the one in
February, 1796, the other in the following month. The moderation
and judgment of General Hoche finally brought about the end of a
war which stands unexampled, in history, for the noble resistance
offered by a small body of peasants to the power of a great
country.

As soon as Monsieur Flambard heard, from his correspondents abroad,
that a consignment of wine was on its way they took an office; for
it had already been agreed that, having no connection for sales to
private customers, they would work only as wholesale merchants,
dealing with the trade and with large hotels and other establishments,
contenting themselves with the smallest possible rate of profit until
they made a connection; and at the end of two or three years, they
were doing a considerable business.

The Henriette sailed for France, shortly after their arrival in
Poole, as the crew preferred returning home. Lefaux was to trade as
before and, being so well known at all the western ports, was
certain of obtaining freights. He was to pay wages and all other
expenses, and to transmit the balance as opportunity occurred.

Three years later, when the internal affairs of the country had
calmed down, Jean managed to get a letter sent to the priest of
their village, asking him to inquire about Marthe; and after a
considerable time an answer was received, saying that she and
Francois had reached home in safety, had been married shortly after
their return, and were doing well; having, with their joint
savings, purchased at a very low price one of Jean's confiscated
farms.

Ten years later the firm of Flambard, Martin, & Stansfield were
doing a large business, and when the war came to a termination, and
trade with Bordeaux, Charente, and Nantes was renewed, Monsieur
Flambard returned to Bordeaux and, having a large connection there,
the firm soon became known as the largest importers of foreign
wines in London.

Madame Martin had, long before that, died. Patsey was the mother of
three boys and two girls, and Leigh had a separate establishment of
his own, and had been for fifteen years a married man. Mr.
Stansfield was still alive, and things went on at Netherstock in
very much the same fashion as before Patsey left home.

Jacques Martin had been one of the many who were guillotined when
the terror came to an end, after the death of Robespierre.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of No Surrender!, by G. A. Henty

