The aid which John gave enabled most of the fugitives in his
district to return to their distant villages, and to rebuild their
homes, where there was now little fear of their being again
disturbed. The distress in his own district was also relieved. In
some cases money was given, in others lent, to enable the
cultivators to till their fields, to replant vineyards, and to
purchase flocks so that, in the course of a year, the whole
district was restored to its normal appearance, and the signs of
the destructive war were almost entirely effaced.

Then John was able to settle down in his quiet home. In the morning
he worked with his father. In the afternoon he listened to the
complaints, or petitions, of those who came before him; settling
disputes between neighbours, hearing the stories of those who
considered that they were too hardly pressed upon by the tax
collector, and doing justice to those who were wronged.

Soon after he married, mindful of the doctrines he had heard during
his visit among the community of Nazarites by the Dead Sea, John
made inquiries and found that many of the sect, who had left the
land when the troubles with the Romans commenced, had now returned;
and were preaching their doctrines more openly than before, now
that those of the ancient religion could no longer persecute them.
At Tiberias a considerable community of the sect soon established
themselves; and John, going over, persuaded one of their teachers
to take up his abode with him, for a time, and to expound their
doctrines to him and his family. He was astonished at the spirit of
love, charity, and goodwill which animated the teaching of the
Christians--still more at the divine spirit that breathed in the
utterances and animated the life of their Master.

The central idea, that God was the God of the whole world--and not,
as the Jews had hitherto supposed, a special Deity of their
own--struck John particularly, and explained many things which had,
hitherto, been difficult for him to understand. It would have been
galling to admit as much, in the days of Jewish pride and
stubbornness; but their spirit was broken, now; and John could
understand that although, as long as the nation had believed in him
and served him, God had taken a peculiar interest in them, and had
revealed to them much of his nature and attributes--while the rest
of the world had had been left to worship false gods--He yet loved
all the world, and was now about to extend to all men that
knowledge of him hitherto confined to the Jews. Above all, John saw
how vastly higher was the idea of God, as revealed in the new
teaching, than that which the Jews had hitherto entertained
regarding him.

A month after the arrival of the teacher, John and Mary were
baptized into the new faith; and a few months later Simon and
Martha, who had been harder to convince, also became converts.

When Titus was raised to the imperial throne, John, in compliance
with the request he had made him, journeyed to Rome, and remained
there for a short time as his guest. Titus received him with
affection.

"I shall not try to tempt you with fresh offers of honours," he
said, "though I regret that you should refuse to accept a sphere of
wider usefulness. From time to time, I have heard of you from the
reports of my governors; who say that the district under your
charge is the most prosperous and contented in all Palestine, that
there is neither dispute nor litigation there, that there are no
poor, that the taxes are collected without difficulty; and that,
save only that you do not keep up the state and dignity which a
Roman official should occupy, you are in all respects a model
ruler."

"I have every reason to be thankful," John said. "I have been
blessed in every way. My parents still survive. I am happy with my
wife and children. Your bounty has enabled me to bind up the
wounds, and relieve the distress caused by the war. My mind has
been opened to heavenly teaching, and I try humbly to follow in the
steps of that divine teacher, Jesus of Nazareth."

"Ah, you have come to believe in him!" Titus said. "There are many
of his creed, here in Rome, and they say that they are even on the
increase. I would gladly hear, from you, something of him. I have
heard somewhat of him from Josephus, who for three years dwelt
among the Essenes, and who has spoken to me very highly of the
purity of life, the enlightenment, and religious fervour of that
sect--to which, I believe, he himself secretly inclines; although,
from the desire not to offend his countrymen, he makes no open
confession of his faith."

John, before he left, explained to the emperor the teachings of his
Master; and it may be that the wisdom, humanity, and mildness which
Titus displayed, in the course of his reign, was in no small degree
the result of the lessons which he learned from John.

The latter came no more to Rome but, to the end of his life, dwelt
on the shore of Galilee, wisely governing his little district after
the manner of the judges of old.

Jonas never left his friend. He married the daughter of one of the
fishermen, and lived in a small house which Simon built for him,
close to his own. At the death of the latter, he became John's
right hand on the farm; and remained his friend, and brother, to
the end.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of For the Temple, by G. A. Henty

