less of a state one, the two ladies of the house are in a considerable
state of flutter over the preparations.

While they are absorbed in the mysterious orgies of the kitchen, the
four gentlemen are sitting round the cheery little parlour fire with
their feet on the fender, talking about a great many things.

One of the gentlemen is middle-aged, with hair turning white, and a face
which looks as if it had seen stormy weather in its journey through
life.  He is the quietest of the party, the talk being chiefly sustained
by two younger men of about twenty-one years, considerably assisted by a
boy who appears to be very much at home on every subject, especially
boots and mothers.  Indeed, this boy (who might be ten, or might be
fifteen, there is nothing in his figure or face or voice to say which),
is the liveliest member of the party, and keeps the others, even
occasionally the older gentleman, amused.

In due time the ladies appear, as trim and unconcerned as if they had
never put their foot in a kitchen all their lives, and the circle round
the fire widens to admit them.  The elder of these ladies is a careworn
but pleasant, motherly-looking body, who calls the elder gentleman "sir"
when she speaks to him, and invariably addresses one of the two young
men--the one with the black eyes--as Mister Johnny.  As for the younger
lady, whose likeness to Mister Johnny is very apparent, she is all
sunshine and smiles, and one wonders how the little parlour was lighted
at all before she entered it.

At least the other young man--he without the black eyes--wonders thus as
he looks towards where she sits with the elder gentleman's hand in her
own, and her smiles putting even the hearth to shame.

"So, Billy," says she, addressing the boy, "you've been made office-boy
at Hawk Street, I hear?"

"I are so--leastways I ham so," replies Billy, who appears to be in some
difficulty just now with his mother tongue.

"You mustn't stand on your head in the office, you know," says the young
lady, with a mischievous smile, "or the junior partner would be
horrified."

The young lady's brother smiles, as if this observation referred to him,
and the elderly lady looks particularly proud, for some reason or other.

"That there bloke--" begins the boy.

"Order, sir," exclaims the young lady; "haven't I told you, Billy, that
`bloke' is not a nice word?  It's all very well for a shoeblack, but it
won't do for an office-boy."

"You do jaw me--" again began the boy.

"I what you?"

"Jaw--leastways you tork, you do," said Billy, who appeared to be as
much in awe of the young lady as he was hopeless of attaining the
classical English.

"I say, Mary," laughed the brother, "you might give Billy a holiday to-
day, as it's Christmas Day.  You can't expect him to master the Queen's
English all at once."

So Billy is allowed to express himself for the rest of the evening in
the way most natural to him, and shows his gratitude by making ample use
of his liberty.

Presently the elder lady disappears, and returns in a minute or two with
the information that dinner is ready, an announcement which Billy greets
with the laconic ejaculation, "Proper!"

It is a cheery Christmas dinner that.  The elderly gentleman is rather
quiet, and so is the young gentleman called Fred, who looks a great deal
oftener at the young lady than he does at the plate before him.  But the
others make up in fun and chatter for the silence of these two, and as
the meal goes on the good spirits of the party rise all round.

"This is rather better than Drury Lane, eh, Jack?" says Fred.

"Rather," says Jack.  "The only fear is about its being too far away for
father."

"Not at all," says the elder gentleman.  "I'm better already for the
walk every day.  You've no idea how agreeable the streets are at three
o'clock every morning."

"Do you remember our first walk out this way, Fred," says Jack, "when we
tried to find out Flanagan?"

"Yes, I do, indeed.  We missed him, but we found Billy instead."

"Yaas, and you was a nice pair of flats, you was, when I fust comed
across you," observes Billy, who, I regret to say, has not quite
finished his mouthful of plum-pudding before he speaks.

"They're pulling down the court, I see, Billy," says Fred.

"They are so.  'Tain't no concern of mine, though, now she's hooked it."

Billy says this with a grave face, and means no irreverence in thus
speaking of his dead mother.

"Mr Hawkesbury will be almost sorry to see it pulled down," says Jack,
"for he had done so much good there."

"Poor Mr Hawkesbury!" says Mary.  "I wish he would have come to us to-
day.  But he says he would be happier at his regular work, and we hadn't
the heart to urge him."

"He's good deal happier now, though," says Fred, "since he heard from
his son.  In fact, he's had one or two letters, and Hawkesbury really
seems to be turning over a new leaf; so the father is quite hopeful."

There is a pause, and then Jack changes the subject.

"Talking of pulling down places," says he, "I saw an advertisement to-
day, Fred, of the sale of that valuable and desirable place, Stonebridge
House."

"Did you?" says Fred.

And then follows a talk about old school days in which more present are
interested than the two who actually take part.

"It seems a long while since we were there," says Jack.

"It's seven years six months and a week to-day since I left," says Fred.

"Why, how exact you are in your dates!" smiles the young lady.

"It was on the eighteenth of June," replies Fred.  "I recollect it
because it was on the twenty-first that I first met you."

He had not meant to say this, and blushes when it escapes him, and for
the next minute or two he occupies himself with his plate.  So does the
young lady with hers.

Then the talk drifts off to other subjects, and the party fall to
sketching out the programme of their new life in London.  Jack is to be
home to tea every evening at seven, and as Jack's father has not to
leave for his newspaper office till eight, the little family will at any
rate get one hour a day together.  And as soon as the spring comes Miss
Mary is going to convert the little strip of garden behind into a second
paradise, and Mr Fred, if he pleases, may come and help her.  Indeed,
it is taken for granted that, although his lodging is away in a street
hard by, he is to be considered as free of this house and one of the
family; as also is Billy, provided he does not call Jack "bloke," and
attends diligently to the instructions Miss Mary promises to give him
two evenings a week.

In due time dinner is ended, and the little party once more congregate
round the parlour fire.  Scarcely have they assembled when there is a
ring at the door, and next moment a cheery gentleman called Doubleday is
announced.  Every one welcomes the visitor warmly, and room is made for
him in the magic circle.

"Thought I'd call and pay my respects," says Mr Doubleday, bobbing to
the ladies.  "Jolly snug little box you've got here, too."

"Yes, it is snug," says Jack.

"Glad to see you settled down before I go," says the other.  "Settled
down both here and at Hawk Street too, eh?"

"I'm awfully sorry you're going abroad," says Jack, "we shall miss you
badly."

"Oh, I'll soon be back.  You see, it's rather a good offer, this Bombay
agency, and I'm bound to have to hop over to the old country every now
and then to look you up."

"The oftener the better," says every one.

Mr Doubleday fidgets a bit in his chair, and then remarks, "I say,
Smith, excuse my saying it, but I'm very glad you ever came to Hawk
Street, and I may as well tell you so."

Jack is about to say something, but Doubleday is before him.

"I know what you're going to say, but it's a fact.  Batch here thinks so
too."

Mr Fred assents warmly.

"Fact is," says Doubleday, "I don't know how you did the trick, but
you've drawn more than one of us out of Queer Street."

"What do you--" begins Jack, but Doubleday continues, "Of course you'll
deny it, but no one believes you; do they, Batch?  Why, even Crow was
saying yesterday--"

"That's Flanikin," exclaimed Billy at this point, as another ring
sounded at the door.

This interruption, though it cuts short Mr Doubleday's speech, is a
decidedly pleasant one; and when a burly, rosy-faced Irish gentleman
enters and joins the party the magic circle seems finally complete.

I need not recount all the talk of that happy Christmas evening.  It was
a merry Christmas, without doubt, though not a boisterous one.  No one
seemed to want any better enjoyment than chatting over old times, or
sitting and listening while others chatted; and when Mary's sweet voice
rang out presently in the words of some of the grand old Christmas
hymns, the joy that lit up more than one face in the happy group spoke
more eloquently than words of the true happiness which this season of
peace and goodwill brought to their hearts.

In due time the hands of the little clock crawl round to eleven, and the
two visitors rise to leave.

When they are gone the rest of the party once more draw in round the
fire.  By some accident, I suppose, Mr Fred's chair finds itself next
to Miss Mary's, which, as it turns out, is convenient, for these two
young people happen to have a good deal to say to one another which can
only be spoken in whispers.

What they say, or most of what they say, is doubtless silly enough.  But
one or two sentences have some truth in them, and seem to express what
is in the hearts of all that little party.

"Yes," says Mary, "it really does seem as if this was the beginning of a
happy time for us all."

"I hope and trust it may be," Fred responds.

"Dear father seems better in health and spirits already, doesn't he?
And Jack--Well, I dare say you are jealous of our taking him away from
you?"

"Jealous, no!" says Fred.  "He deserves all the happiness he has found,
and far more."

"Yes," responds Mary.  "He has always been a good brother."

"This one thing I know," says Fred.  "If there is any good in me--and
there's precious little--I owe it all, under God, to my friend Smith."

And, reader, I owe it still.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Friend Smith, by Talbot Baines Reed

