there was a brief consultation between him and General Pelissier. A
few hasty orders were given and, in an instant, the whole of the
staff were dashing away to different parts of the ground.

"Charge in line!" was the order and, forming shoulder to shoulder,
the Garibaldians and Mobiles moved forward in a grand line, a mile
and a half long; uttering loud and inspiriting cheers. The boys had
been sent to the regiments next to each other and, their message
delivered, they joined each other and rode on with the advancing
line.

"This is grand, Ralph," Percy said, enthusiastically. "We have seen
a good many defeats. We are going to wind up with a victory, at
last."

For a while the Germans stood their ground, pouring a shower of
shot and shell into the advancing French; but the dash and go of
the latter--excited by their successes of the two preceding
days--were irresistible. The Germans wavered and fell back as the
French advanced and, from that moment, the fate of the day was
decided. Isolated German regiments fought desperately, but in vain.
The French pushed them back, from position to position, until
nightfall covered the retreat.

The German loss was very heavy; and the French, in addition to a
considerable number of prisoners, had the satisfaction of taking a
German color--the only one captured throughout the war.

This was the last fight in which the Barclays took part during the
war. The boys escaped unhurt; as did their father, who had joined
one of the regiments of Mobiles, and had advanced with them.

The events followed fast, day after day. In rapid succession, they
heard of the defeat of Chanzy at Le Mans, the retreat of Bourbaki;
the terrible sufferings of the troops, as they fell back upon the
Swiss frontier, for refuge. Simultaneously with the news of this
retreat came the intelligence of the surrender of Paris, and of the
armistice and, grieving over France's misfortune, they were yet
heartily rejoiced that the hopeless contest was over.

No sooner were the preliminaries of peace signed than Captain
Barclay carried out his intention of leaving for England. Monsieur
Duburg had already agreed to purchase the cottage, and adjoining
grounds; which he intends for Louis, when he marries. The Barclays
were sorry to leave their uncle and cousins, but there was no great
grief with reference to the separation from Madame Duburg.

General Tempe they parted from with regret. That officer's fighting
days were over, for he lost a leg in the battle before Le Mans.

Ralph obtained the step as major, in consequence of General
Chanzy's report in his favor, but he never put on the uniform of
the rank; nor is it likely that he ever will do so, although he
hopes, some day, to attain the grade in the British service. He is
at present studying hard for an examination in the artillery which,
if practical knowledge goes for anything, he is pretty certain to get.

Percy has had enough of fighting, and his present idea is that he
shall go to the Bar; but he has plenty of time before him, yet.
Both never boast of their achievements--indeed, are straightforward,
unaffected English lads, still--and it is only to intimate friends
that they ever speak of their adventures in the war.

The Barclays live now a short distance out of London; and the pony
chaise in which Captain Barclay drives his wife and Milly can be
seen, any day, on the Richmond road. If you stop and watch it turn
into the little drive, up to the house, you will observe that a
one-armed man--who has previously been busy in the garden--throws
down his spade, and takes the ponies off to the stables and, should
he not happen to be at the front of the house, as the ponies draw
up, you will hear Milly summon him with a loud call of "Tim!"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Franc Tireurs, by G. A. Henty

