
"And is it all right?" she said a minute later. "Can it really be all
right?"

"You may be quite sure that it is all right, Hilda," Mrs. Fortescue
said. "Do you think your father would have brought him up here if it
hadn't been? Now you can come to me, Harry."

"I am glad," she said heartily. "We have had a very bad time. Now,
thank God, it is all over. You see she has only had me to stand by her,
for her brothers, although they have not taken open part against her,
have been disposed to think that it was madness her wasting two years
on the chance of your making a fortune. Of course you have done so, or
you would not be in this drawing-room at present."

"I have done very well, Mrs. Fortescue. I was able to show Mr.
Fortescue a receipt for gold amounting to nearly three hundred thousand
pounds, of which two-thirds belong to me, the rest to my brother."

Mrs. Fortescue uttered an exclamation of astonishment.

"What have you been doing, Harry?" she asked--"plundering a Nabob?"

"Nabobs do not dwell in Peru," he laughed. "No, I have discovered a
long-lost treasure, which, beyond any doubt, was part of the wealth of
Atahualpa, the unfortunate monarch whom Pizarro first plundered and
then slew. It had been sent off by sea, and the vessel was lost. It is
too long a story to tell now."

"And Papa has quite consented, Harry?"

Harry smiled.

"Virtually so, as you might suppose by his bringing me up here.
Actually he has deferred the matter, pending a consultation with you
and Mrs. Fortescue, and will give me his formal answer to-morrow."

The two ladies both smiled.

"If he said that, the matter is settled," the elder said; "he has never
asked my opinion before on the subject, and I have never volunteered
it. But I am sure he has not the slightest doubt as to what I thought
of it. So we can consider it as happily settled after all. If I had
thought that there was the slightest chance of your making a fortune
quickly I should have spoken out; but as I thought it absolutely
hopeless, I have done what I could privately to support Hilda, always
saying, however, that if at the end of the two years nothing came of
it, I could not in any way countenance her throwing away the chances of
her life."

"You were quite right, Mrs. Fortescue. I had fully intended to write to
Hilda at the end of that time releasing her from all promises that she
had made to me, and saying that I felt that I had no right to trouble
her further; but from what she wrote to me, I doubt whether her father
would have found her altogether amenable to his wishes even at the end
of the two years."

A month later there was a wedding in Bedford Square. Among those
present no one was more gratified than Mr. Barnett, whose surprise and
satisfaction were great when Harry told him in confidence the result of
his advice, and especially of his introduction to the Indian guide.

It had been arranged that nothing should be said as to the source from
which Harry had obtained his wealth, as it was possible that the
Peruvian government might set up some claim to it, and it was in Mr.
Fortescue's opinion very doubtful what the result would be, as it had
been discovered so close to the shore.

Harry never took any steps with reference to the gold valley, for the
constant troubles in Peru were sufficient to deter any wealthy men from
investing money there.

The correspondence between him and Dias and his wife was maintained
until they died full of years and greatly lamented by numbers of their
countrymen to whom they had been benefactors.

Bertie never went to sea again except in his own yacht, but when he
came of age, bought an estate near Southampton, and six years later
brought home a mistress for it.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Treasure of the Incas, by G. A. Henty

