Oak_, which was commanded by Captain Douglas. The flames speedily
communicated to the ship, and the crew took to the boats and rowed
ashore. Captain Douglas refused to leave his vessel, and perished in
the flames. The report given by the six men-of-war decided the Dutch
not to attempt anything further against Chatham. On the 14th, they
set fire to the hulks, the _Loyal London_ and the _Great James_,
and carried off the hulk of the _Royal Charles_, after the English
had twice tried to destroy her by fire. As this was the ship in which
the Duke of Albemarle, then General Monk, had brought the King over
to England from Holland, her capture was considered a special triumph
for the Dutch and a special dishonour to us.

The Duke of Albemarle had left Chatham before the Dutch came up. As
the want of crews prevented his being of any use there, and he saw
that Sir Edward Spragge would do all that was possible in defence of
the place, he posted back to London, where his presence was urgently
required, a complete panic reigning. Crowds assembled at Whitehall,
and insulted the King and his ministers as the cause of the present
misfortunes, while at Deptford and Wapping, the sailors and their
wives paraded the streets, shouting that the ill-treatment of our
sailors had brought these things about, and so hostile were their
manifestations that the officials of the Admiralty scarce dared show
themselves in the streets.

Cyril had remained at Chatham, the Duke having recommended him to Sir
Edward Spragge, and he, with some other gentlemen and a few sailors,
had manned the battery opposite Upnor.

The great proportion of the Dutch ships were still at the Nore, as it
would have been dangerous to have hazarded so great a fleet in the
narrow water of the Medway. As it was, two of their men-of-war, on
the way back from Chatham, ran ashore, and had to be burnt. They had
also six fire-ships burnt, and lost over a hundred and fifty men.

Leaving Admiral Van Ness with part of the Fleet in the mouth of the
Thames, De Ruyter sailed first for Harwich, where he attempted to
land with sixteen hundred men in boats, supported by the guns of the
Fleet. The boats, however, failed to effect a landing, being beaten
off, with considerable loss, by the county Militia; and Ruyter then
sailed for Portsmouth, where he also failed. He then went west to
Torbay, where he was likewise repulsed, and then returned to the
mouth of the Thames.

On July 23rd, Van Ness, with twenty-five men-of-war, sailed up the
Hope, where Sir Edward Spragge had now hoisted his flag on board a
squadron of eighteen ships, of whom five were frigates and the rest
fire-ships. A sharp engagement ensued, but the wind was very light,
and the English, by towing their fire-ships, managed to lay them
alongside the Dutch fire-ships, and destroyed twelve of these with a
loss of only six English ships. But, the wind then rising, Sir Edward
retired from the Hope to Gravesend, where he was protected by the
guns at Tilbury.

The next day, being joined by Sir Joseph Jordan, with a few small
ships, he took the offensive, and destroyed the last fire-ship that
the Dutch had left, and compelled the men-of-war to retire. Sir
Edward followed them with his little squadron, and Van Ness, as he
retired down the river, was met by five frigates and fourteen
fire-ships from Harwich. These boldly attacked him. Two of the Dutch
men-of-war narrowly escaped being burnt, another was forced ashore
and greatly damaged, and the whole of the Dutch Fleet was compelled
to bear away.

While these events had been happening in the Thames, the negotiations
at Breda had continued, and, just as the Dutch retreated, the news
came that Peace had been signed. The Dutch, on their side, were
satisfied with the success with which they had closed the war, while
England was, at the moment, unable to continue it, and the King,
seeing the intense unpopularity that had been excited against him by
the affair at Chatham, was glad to ratify the Peace, especially as we
thereby retained possession of several islands we had taken in the
West Indies from the Dutch, and it was manifest that Spain was
preparing to join the coalition of France and Holland against us.

A Peace concluded under such circumstances was naturally but a short
one. When the war was renewed, three years later, the French were in
alliance with us, and, after several more desperate battles, in which
no great advantages were gained on either side, the Dutch were so
exhausted and impoverished by the loss of trade, that a final Peace
was arranged on terms far more advantageous to us than those secured
by the Treaty of 1667. The De Wittes, the authors of the previous
wars, had both been killed in a popular tumult. The Prince of Orange
was at the head of the State, and the fact that France and Spain were
both hostile to Holland had reawakened the feeling of England in
favour of the Protestant Republic, and the friendship between the two
nations has never since been broken.

Cyril took no part in the last war against the Dutch. He, like the
majority of the nation, was opposed to it, and, although willing to
give his life in defence of his country when attacked, felt it by no
means his duty to do so when we were aiding the designs of France in
crushing a brave enemy. Such was in fact the result of the war; for
although peace was made on even terms, the wars of Holland with
England and the ruin caused to her trade thereby, inflicted a blow
upon the Republic from which she never recovered. From being the
great rival of England, both on the sea and in her foreign commerce,
her prosperity and power dwindled until she ceased altogether to be a
factor in European affairs.

After the Peace of Breda was signed, Cyril went down to Upmead,
where, for the next four years, he devoted himself to the management
of his estate. His friendship with Mr. Harvey grew closer and warmer,
until the latter came to consider him in really the light of a son;
and when he died, in 1681, it was found that his will was unaltered,
and that, with the exception of legacies to many of his old employes
at his factory, the whole of his property was left to Cyril. The
latter received a good offer for the tanyard, and, upon an estate
next to his own coming shortly afterwards into the market, he
purchased it, and thus the Upmead estates became as extensive as they
had been before the time of his ancestor, who had so seriously
diminished them during the reign of Elizabeth.

His friendship with the family of the Earl of Wisbech had remained
unaltered, and he had every year paid them a visit, either at Wisbech
or at Sevenoaks. A year after Mr. Harvey's death, he married Dorothy,
who had previously refused several flattering offers.

Captain Dave and his wife lived to a good old age. The business had
largely increased, owing to the energy of their son-in-law, who had,
with his wife and children, taken up his abode in the next house to
theirs, which had been bought to meet the extension of their
business. John Wilkes, at the death of Captain Dave, declined Cyril's
pressing offer to make his home with him.

"It would never do, Sir Cyril," he said. "I should be miserable out
of the sight of ships, and without a place where I could meet
seafaring men, and smoke my pipe, and listen to their yarns."

He therefore remained with Frank Watson, nominally in charge of the
stores, but doing, in fact, as little as he chose until, long past
the allotted age of man, he passed quietly away.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of When London Burned, by G. A. Henty

