These were twenty-two in number. This interview was granted. As she
knew nothing about the Tamul language, I acted as her interpreter.
Through me, she requested the girls to give a statement of their
feelings. One of them arose, and said, "I feel as happy as an angel. I
feel joys that I can express to no one but my Saviour; and I am just as
certain that my sins are forgiven, as if I had sent up a karduthaase,"
that is, a letter to heaven, "and received an answer to it." Another of
the girls said, that the missionaries had often talked with her about
her dedicating herself to the Saviour, but that she did not then know
what it meant. "I now know," added she, "what it means, for God has
taught it to me." Another of the girls said, "Though they put me in the
fire, I will never forsake the Saviour."

Now, my dear children, I must bid you farewell Probably I shall never
see you, unless you come to this heathen land, until I meet you at the
judgment-seat of Christ. If you do not become missionaries, most of you
will probably die, and be buried where you now are. Probably I shall die
in this heathen land. But we shall not always sleep in our graves. After
a little season, the archangel's trumpet will sound, and you in
America, and I in India, shall hear his voice proclaiming, "Awake, ye
dead, and come to judgment." And we shall all at once rise from our
graves, and stand before our Judge. And where shall I then see you?
Shall I see any of you on the left hand of Christ, and hear him say,
"Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels?" O, if I should hear that dreadful sentence pronounced
against you, how would my heart die within me. How could I bear to hear
it. Oh, I could not--I could not bear to hear it. My dear children, if
you are yet out of Christ, I entreat you, _at this very moment_, to lay
down this book, and throw yourselves at the feet of your Saviour. Tell
him, that you are lost sinners, deserving to be cast into everlasting
burnings. Tell him, that though you have been wicked children, you will
leave off your wickedness, and be his for ever. Plead with him, with as
much earnestness as a _drowning_ man would plead with you to save him,
to give you the influences of his Holy Spirit, to create within you a
clean heart, and renew within you a right spirit, without which you are
eternally undone; and continue to plead, until he pardons you, and
receives you as his children. By all the sufferings of the Son of God,
by all the joys of heaven, by all the torments of hell, by the
solemnities of your dying bed, by the value of your immortal souls
_which, if once lost, must be lost for ever_, I beseech you thus
_immediately_ to throw yourselves at his feet, and plead with him to
make you his. Neglect this duty--neglect giving yourselves to Christ,
even for one minute, and it may be, that you will be lost, yea, LOST FOR
EVER.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dr. Scudder's Tales for Little
Readers, About the Heathen., by Dr. John Scudder

