"How my mother and Isabel will delight in you," he said; "and the squire!
You are precisely the girl to take his fancy. We'll go over and see them
as soon as we can, won't we, Clover?"

Clover listened delightedly to all these schemes, but through them all,
like that young Irish lady who went over the marriage service with her
lover adding at the end of every clause, "Provided my father gives his
consent," she interposed a little running thread of protest,--"If papa is
willing. You know, Geoff, I can't really promise anything till I've talked
with papa."

It was settled that until Dr. Carr had been consulted, the affair was not
to be called an engagement, or spoken of to any one; only Clover asked
Geoff to tell Clarence all about it at once.

The thought of Clarence was, in truth, the one cloud in her happiness just
then. It was impossible to calculate how he would take the news. If it
made him angry or very unhappy, if it broke up his friendship with Geoff,
and perhaps interfered with their partnership so that one or other of them
must leave the High Valley, Clover felt that it would grievously mar her
contentment. There was no use in planning anything till they knew how he
would feel and act. In any case, she realized that they were bound to
consider him before themselves, and make it as easy and as little painful
as possible. If he were vexatious, they must be patient; if sulky, they
must be forbearing.

Phil opened his eyes very wide at the pair sitting so coseyly over the
fire when at last he came in.

"I say, have _you_ been here all the evening?" he cried. "Well, that's a
sell! I wouldn't have gone out if I'd known."

"We've missed you very much," quoth Geoff; and then he laughed as at some
extremely good joke, and Clover laughed too.

"You seem to have kept up your spirits pretty well, considering," remarked
Phil, dryly. Boys of eighteen are not apt to enjoy jokes which do not
originate with themselves; they are suspicious of them.

"I suppose I must go now," said Geoff, looking at his watch; "but I shall
see you again before I leave. I'll come in to-morrow after I've met my
man."

"All right," said Phil; "I won't go out till you come."

"Oh, pray don't feel obliged to stay in. I can't at all tell when I shall
be able to get through with the fellow."

"Come to dinner if you can," suggested Clover. "Phil is sure to be at home
then."

Lovers are like ostriches. Geoff went away just shaking hands casually,
and was very particular to say "Miss Carr;" and he and Clover felt that
they had managed so skilfully and concealed their secret so well; yet the
first remark made by Phil as the door shut was, "Geoff seems queer
to-night, somehow, and so do you. What have you been talking about all the
evening?"

An observant younger brother is a difficult factor in a love affair.

Two days passed. Clover looked in vain for a note from the High Valley to
say how Clarence had borne the revelation; and she grew more nervous with
every hour. It was absolutely necessary now to dismantle the house, and
she found a certain relief in keeping exceedingly busy. Somehow the
break-up had lost its inexplicable pain, and a glad little voice sang all
the time at her heart, "I shall come back; I shall certainly come back.
Papa will let me, I am sure, when he knows Geoff, and how nice he is."

She was at the dining-table wrapping a row of books in paper ready for
packing, when a step sounded, and glancing round she saw Clarence himself
standing in the doorway. He did not look angry, as she had feared he
might, or moody; and though he avoided her eye at first, his face was
resolute and kind.

"Geoff has told me," were his first words. "I know from what he said that
you, and he too, are afraid that I shall make myself disagreeable; so I've
come in to say that I shall do nothing of the kind."

"Dear Clarence, that wasn't what Geoff meant, or I either," said Clover,
with a rush of relief, and holding out both her hands to him; "what we
were afraid of was that you might be unhappy."

"Well," in a husky tone, and holding the little hands very tight, "it
isn't easy, of course, to give up a hope. I've held on to mine all this
time, though I've told myself a hundred times that I was a fool for doing
so, and though I knew in my heart it was no use. Now I've had two days to
think it over and get past the first shock, and, Clover, I've decided. You
and Geoff are the best friends I've got in the world. I never seemed to
make friends, somehow. Till you came to Hillsover that time nobody liked
me much; I don't know why. I can't get along without you two; so I give
you up without any hard feeling, and I mean to be as jolly as I can about
it. After all, to have you at the High Valley will be a sort of happiness,
even if you don't come for my sake exactly," with an attempt at a laugh.

"Clarence, you really are a dear boy! I can't tell you how I thank you,
and how I admire you for being so nice about this."

"Then that's worth something, too. I'd do a good deal to win your
approval, Clover. So it's all settled. Don't worry about me, or be afraid
that I shall spoil your comfort with sour looks. If I find I can't stand
it, I'll go away for a while; but I don't think it'll come to that. You'll
make a real home out of the ranch house, and you'll let me have my share
of your life, and be a brother to you and Geoff; and I'll try to be a good
one."

Clover was touched to the heart by these manful words so gently spoken.

"You shall be our dear special brother always," she said. "Only this was
needed to make me quite happy. I am so glad you don't want to go away and
leave us, or to have us leave you. We'll make the ranch over into the
dearest little home in the world, and be so cosey there all together, and
papa and the others shall come out for visits; and you'll like them so
much, I know, Elsie especially."

"Does she look like you?"

"Not a bit; she's ever so much prettier."

"I don't believe a word of that"

Clover's heart being thus lightened of its only burden by this treaty of
mutual amity, she proceeded joyously with her packing. Mrs. Hope said she
was not half sorry enough to go away, and Poppy upbraided her as a gay
deceiver without any conscience or affections. She laughed and protested
and denied, but looked so radiantly satisfied the while as to give a fair
color for her friends' accusations, especially as she could not explain
the reasons of her contentment or hint at her hopes of return. Mrs. Hope
probably had her suspicions, for she was rather urgent with Clover to
leave this thing and that for safe keeping "in case you ever come back;"
but Clover declined these offers, and resolutely packed up everything with
a foolish little superstition that it was "better luck" to do so, and that
papa would like it better.

Quite a little group of friends assembled at the railway station to see
her and Phil set off. They were laden with flowers and fruit and "natural
soda-water" with which to beguile the long journey, and with many good
wishes and affectionate hopes that they might return some day.

"Something tells me that you will," Mrs. Hope declared. "I feel it in my
bones, and they hardly ever deceive me. My mother had the same kind; it's
in the family."

"Something tells me that you must," cried Poppy, embracing Clover; "but
I'm afraid it isn't bones or anything prophetic, but only the fact that I
want you to so very much."

From the midst of these farewells Clover's eyes crossed the valley and
sought out Mount Cheyenne.

"How differently I should be feeling," she thought, "if this were going
away with no real hope of coming back! I could hardly have borne to look
at you had that been the case, you dear beautiful thing; but I _am_ coming
back to live close beside you always, and oh, how glad I am!"

"Is that good-by to Cheyenne?" asked Marian, catching the little wave of a
hand.

"Yes, it _is_ good-by; but I have promised him that it shall soon be
how-do-you-do again. Mount Cheyenne and I understand each other."

"I know; you have always had a sentimental attachment to that mountain.
Now Pike's Peak is _my_ affinity. We get on beautifully together."

"Pike's Peak indeed! I am ashamed of you."

Then the train moved away amid a flutter of handkerchiefs, but still
Clover and Phil were not left to themselves; for Dr. Hope, who had a
consultation in Denver, was to see them safely off in the night express,
and Geoff had some real or invented business which made it necessary for
him to go also.

Clover carried with her through all the three days' ride the lingering
pressure of Geoff's hand, and his whispered promise to "come on soon." It
made the long way seem short. But when they arrived, amid all the kisses
and rejoicings, the exclamations over Phil's look of health and vigor, the
girls' intense interest in all that she had seen and done, papa's warm
approval of her management, her secret began to burn guiltily within her.
What _would_ they all say when they knew?

And what did they say? I think few of you will be at a loss to guess.
Life--real life as well as life in story-books--is full of such shocks and
surprises. They are half happy, half unhappy; but they have to be borne.
Younger sisters, till their own turns come, are apt to take a severe view
of marriage plans, and to feel that they cruelly interrupt a past order of
things which, so far as they are concerned, need no improvement. And
parents, who say less and understand better, suffer, perhaps, more. "To
bear, to rear, to lose," is the order of family history, generally
unexpected, always recurring.

But true love is not selfish. In time it accustoms itself to anything
which secures happiness for its object. Dr. Carr did confide to Katy in a
moment of private explosion that he wished the Great West had never been
invented, and that such a prohibitory tax could be laid upon young
Englishmen as to make it impossible that another one should ever be landed
on our shores; but he had never in his life refused Clover anything upon
which she had set her heart, and he saw in her eyes that her heart was
very much set on this. John and Elsie scolded and cried, and then in time
began to talk of their future visits to High Valley till they grew to
anticipate them, and be rather in a hurry for them to begin. Geoff's
arrival completed their conversion.

"Nicer than Ned," Johnnie pronounced him; and even Dr. Carr was forced to
confess that the sons-in-law with which Fate had provided him were of a
superior sort; only he wished that they didn't want to marry _his_ girls!

Phil, from first to last, was in favor of the plan, and a firm ally to the
lovers. He had grown extremely Western in his ideas, and was persuaded in
his mind that "this old East," as he termed it, with its puny
possibilities, did not amount to much, and that as soon as he was old
enough to shape his own destinies, he should return to the only section of
the country worthy the attention of a young man of parts. Meanwhile, he
was perfectly well again, and willing to comply with his father's desire
that before he made any positive arrangements for his future, he should
get a sound and thorough education.

    "So you are actually going out to the wild and barbarous West,
    to live on a ranch, milk cows, chase the wild buffalo to its
    lair, and hold the tiger-cat by its favorite forelock," wrote
    Rose Red. "What was that you were saying only the other day
    about nice convenient husbands, who cruise off for 'good long
    times,' and leave their wives comfortably at home with their own
    families? And here you are planning to marry a man who, whenever
    he isn't galloping after cattle, will be in your pocket at home!
    Oh, Clover, Clover, how inconsistent a thing is woman,--not to
    say girl,--and what havoc that queer deity named Cupid does make
    with preconceived opinions! I did think I could rely on you; but
    you are just as bad as the rest of us, and when a lad whistles,
    go off after him wherever he happens to lead, and think it the
    best thing possible to do so. It's a mad world, my masters; and
    I'm thankful that Roslein is only four and a half years old."

And Clover's answer was one line on a postal card,--

    "Guilty, but recommended to mercy!"



