for my own cool home.  Now Sunbeam, Breeze, Leaf, and Flake, fly back
to the Seasons whence you came, and tell them that, thanks to their
kind gifts, Ripple's work at last is done."

Then down along the shining pathway spread before her, the happy
little Spirit glided to the sea.


"Thanks, dear Summer-Wind," said the Queen; "we will remember the
lessons you have each taught us, and when next we meet in Fern Dale,
you shall tell us more.  And now, dear Trip, call them from the lake,
for the moon is sinking fast, and we must hasten home."

The Elves gathered about their Queen, and while the rustling leaves
were still, and the flowers' sweet voices mingled with their own,
they sang this



FAIRY SONG.


   The moonlight fades from flower and tree,
     And the stars dim one by one;
   The tale is told, the song is sung,
     And the Fairy feast is done.
   The night-wind rocks the sleeping flowers,
     And sings to them, soft and low.
   The early birds erelong will wake:
    'T is time for the Elves to go.

   O'er the sleeping earth we silently pass,
     Unseen by mortal eye,
   And send sweet dreams, as we lightly float
     Through the quiet moonlit sky;--
   For the stars' soft eyes alone may see,
     And the flowers alone may know,
   The feasts we hold, the tales we tell:
     So 't is time for the Elves to go.

   From bird, and blossom, and bee,
     We learn the lessons they teach;
   And seek, by kindly deeds, to win
     A loving friend in each.
   And though unseen on earth we dwell,
     Sweet voices whisper low,
   And gentle hearts most joyously greet
     The Elves where'er they go.

   When next we meet in the Fairy dell,
     May the silver moon's soft light
   Shine then on faces gay as now,
     And Elfin hearts as light.
   Now spread each wing, for the eastern sky
     With sunlight soon will glow.
   The morning star shall light us home:
     Farewell! for the Elves must go.


As the music ceased, with a soft, rustling sound the Elves
spread their shining wings, and flew silently over the sleeping earth;
the flowers closed their bright eyes, the little winds were still,
for the feast was over, and the Fairy lessons ended.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Flower Fables, by Louisa May Alcott

