Great Spirit of the world, not as a craven does, at the last moment,
when overtaken by death, but as he had often done before, with the
assurance that his prayer was heard.  With a simplicity as touching as
it was earnest, he spoke aloud his forgiveness of the Shawnees, saying
that he wished not their scalps, and had not taken any for several
years, not since the Great Spirit had sent a wonderful light in his
soul.  For a moment more he was silent, and then opening his eyes,
uttered the name of Niniotan.

"I am here before you!" replied the boy.

"Niniotan, be a Huron warrior; be as Oonomoo has been; never take the
scalp of a foe, and kill none except in honorable warfare; live and die
a Christian."

As was his custom, when addressing his wife or boy, this exhortation
was given in his own tongue, so that the missionary was the only one
beside them who understood it.  Languidly shutting his eyes again,
Oonomoo said: "Read out of Good Book."

The good man was pained beyond description to find that the
pocket-Bible, which he always carried with him, had been lost during
his hurried approach to this spot.  But Fluellina, who had caught the
words, said: "It is in my bosom."

The missionary reached down and drew it forth, and, as he did so, all
the men noticed the red stains upon it, while he himself felt the warm,
fresh blood upon his hand.  Instinctively he opened the volume at the
fifteenth chapter of Corinthians, that beautiful letter of the
Apostle's, in which the triumphant and glorious resurrection of the
body at the last day is pictured in the sublime language of inspiration:

"'As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

"'And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the
image of the heavenly.

"'Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.

"'Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed.

"'In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed.

"'For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality.

"'So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.

"'Oh death, where is thy sting?  Oh grave, where is thy victory?--'"

The hands of Oonomoo and Fluellina, which had still remained clasped
upon the lap of the missionary, suddenly closed with incredible force,
and rising to the sitting position, as if assisted by an invisible arm,
they both opened their eyes to their widest extent, and fixing them for
a moment upon the clear sky above, sunk slowly and quietly back, dead!
A profound stillness reigned for several minutes after it was certain
the spirits of Oonomoo and Fluellina had departed.  Gently removing
their heads from his lap to the ground, the missionary arose, and in so
doing, broke the spell that was resting upon all.  Niniotan stood like
a statue, his arms folded and his stony gaze fixed upon the senseless
forms of his parents.  Placing his hand upon his head, the man of God
addressed him in the tones of a father:

"Let Niniotan heed the words of Oonomoo; let him grow up a Christian
warrior, and when his spirit leaves this world, it will join his and
Fluellina's in the happy hunting-grounds in the sky.  Niniotan, I offer
you a home at our mission-house so long as you choose to remain.  Your
mother was brought to me when an infant, and I have educated her in the
fear of God.  Will you go with me?"  The boy replied in his native
dialect: "Niniotan will never forget the words of Oonomoo.  His heart
is warm toward the kind father of Fluellina, and he will never forget
him.  The woods are the home of Niniotan, the green earth is his bed
and the blue sky is his blanket.  Niniotan goes to them."

[Illustration: Niniotan stood like a statue, his arms folded and his
stony gaze fixed upon the senseless forms of his parents.]

Turning his back upon his white friends, the young warrior walked away
and soon disappeared from sight in the arches of the forest.  [He kept
his word, living a life of usefulness as had Oonomoo, being the
unswerving friend of the whites all through Tecumseh's war, and dying
less than ten years since in the Indian Territory beyond the
Mississippi, loved and respected by the whites as well as by all of his
own kindred.]

"Friends," said the missionary, "you have witnessed a scene which I
trust will not be lost upon you.  Live and die in the simple faith of
this untutored Indian and all will be well."

"Captain," added the speaker, addressing Captain Prescott, "he has been
a true friend to our race for years, and we must do him what kindness
we can.  If we leave these bodies here, the Shawnees will return and
mutilate them--"

"God bless me! it shan't be done! it shan't be done!  Form a litter,
boys, form a litter, and place them on it.  We'll bury them at the
settlement, and build them a monument a thousand feet high--yes,
sir--every inch of it."

A few minutes later, the party, bearing among them the bodies of
Oonomoo and Fluellina, set out for the settlement, which was reached
just as the sun was disappearing in the west.  The lifeless forms were
placed in the block-house for the night.  The next morning a large and
deep grave was dug in a cool grove just back of the village, into which
the two bodies, suitably inclosed, were lowered.  The last rites were
performed by the good missionary, and as the sods fell upon the
coffins, there was not a dry eye in the numerous assembly.

The avowal of Captain Prescott that the faithful Huron should have a
monument erected to his memory, was something more than the impulse of
the moment.  Knowing the affection with which he was regarded by the
settlers all along the frontier, he took pains to spread the
particulars of his death, and to invite contributions for the purpose
mentioned.  The response was far more liberal than he had, dared to
hope, and showed the vast services of Oonomoo during his life--services
of which none but the recipients knew anything.

At this time, there was a band of border rangers in existence, known as
the _Riflemen of the Miami_.  Oonomoo had often acted as their guide,
and these were the first that were heard from.  Lewis Dernor, their
leader, visited the settlement on purpose to learn the facts regarding
his death, and to bring the gifts of himself and companions.  Then
there was Stanton and Ferrington, and scores of others, who continued
to pour in their contributions through the summer, until Captain
Prescott possessed the means of erecting as magnificent a monument as
his heart could wish.

In the autumn, affairs on the frontier became so quiet and settled that
the Captain was able to visit the East, where he gave orders for the
marble monument, which it was promised should be sent down the river
the next spring.  Upon the return of Captain Prescott, the wedding of
his daughter and Lieutenant Canfield took place, and they settled down
in the village.  The Captain did not venture again to erect his house
in so exposed a situation, until the advancing tide of civilization
made it a matter of safety.  A handsome edifice then rose from the
ruins of his first residence.  General peace dawning upon the border,
he removed his family to it, and turned farmer.  His possessions
continually increased in value until a few years after the commencement
of the present century, and when he died, there were few wealthier men
in the West.

During the war of 1812, Lieutenant Canfield was promoted to a
Captaincy, and served under General Harrison until all hostilities had
ceased.  He then retired with his family to private life, taking his
abode upon the farm which had been left him by his father-in-law, where
he resided until 1843, when he followed the partner of his joys and
sorrows--the once captive of the Shawnees--to his last, long home.

As the traveler passes down the Ohio river on one of its many steamers,
his attention perhaps is attracted to a beautiful grove of oaks,
willows and sycamores a short distance from the shore, beneath whose
arches a tall, white marble obelisk may be discerned with some
inscription and design upon it.  Approaching it more closely, there is
seen engraved on the front, the figure of the Holy Bible, open, with a
hand beneath pointing upward.  Below this, are cut the simple words:

      OONOMOO,

  THE FRIEND OF THE WHITE MAN.



