'em, an Mit Vildy 'dopted 'em all! In 't that a nite tory, you
_ser-weet_ ittle Mit Vildy Tummins?"

Samantha hardly knew why the tears should spring to her eyes as she
watched the dinner party,--unless it was because we can scarcely look at
little children in their unconscious play without a sort of sadness,
partly of pity and partly of envy, and of longing too, as for something
lost and gone. And Samantha could look back to the time when she had sat
at little tables set with bits of broken china, yes, in this very
summer-house, and little Martha was always so gay, and David used to
laugh so! "But there was no use in tryin' to make folks any dif'rent,
'specially if they was such nat'ral born fools they couldn't see a hole
in a grindstun 'thout hevin' it hung on their noses!" and with these
large and charitable views of human nature, Samantha walked back to the
gate, and met Timothy as he came out of the orchard. She knew then what
he had been doing. The boy had certain quaint thoughts and ways that
were at once a revelation and an inspiration to these two plain women,
and one of them was this. To step softly into the side orchard on
pleasant evenings, and without a word, before or afterwards, to lay a
nosegay on Martha's little white doorplate. And if Miss Vilda chanced to
be at the window he would give her a quiet little smile, as much as to
say, "We have no need of words, we two!" And Vilda, like one of old, hid
all these doings in her heart of hearts, and loved the boy with a love
passing knowledge.

Samantha and Timothy walked down the hill to the store. Yes, David
Milliken was sitting all alone on the loafer's bench at the door, and
why wasn't he at prayer-meetin' where he ought to be? She was glad she
chanced to have on her clean purple calico, and that Timothy had
insisted on putting a pink Ma'thy Washington geranium in her collar, for
it was just as well to make folks' mouth water whether they had sense
enough to eat or not.

"Who is that sorry-looking man that always sits on the bench at the
store, Samanthy?"

"That's David Milliken."

"Why does he look so sorry, Samanthy?"

"Oh, he's all right. He likes it fust-rate, wearin' out that hard bench
settin' on it night in 'n' night out, like a bump on a log! But, there,
Timothy, I've gone 'n' forgot the whole pepper, 'n' we're goin' to
pickle seed cowcumbers to-morrer. You take the lard home 'n' put it in
the cold room, 'n' ondress Gay 'n' git her to bed, for I've got to call
int' Mis' Mayhew's goin' along back."

It was very vexatious to be obliged to pass David Milliken a second
time; "though there warn't no sign that he cared anything about it one
way or 'nother, bein' blind as a bat, 'n' deef as an adder, 'n' dumb as
a fish, 'n' settin' stockstill there with no coat on, 'n' the wind
blowin' up for rain, 'n' four o' the Millikens layin' in the churchyard
with gallopin' consumption." It was in this frame of mind that she
purchased the whole pepper, which she could have eaten at that moment as
calmly as if it had been marrow-fat peas; and in this frame of mind she
might have continued to the end of time had it not been for one of those
unconsidered trifles that move the world when the great forces have
given up trying. As she came out of the store and passed David, her eye
fell on a patch in the flannel shirt that covered his bent shoulders.
The shirt was gray and (oh, the pity of it!) the patch was red; and it
was laid forlornly on outside, and held by straggling stitches of carpet
thread put on by patient, clumsy fingers. That patch had an irresistible
pathos for a woman!

Samantha Ann Ripley never exactly knew what happened. Even the wisest of
down-East virgins has emotional lapses once in a while, and she
confessed afterwards that her heart riz right up inside of her like a
yeast cake. Mr. Berry, the postmaster, was in the back of the store
reading postal cards. Not a soul was in sight. She managed to get down
over the steps, though something with the strength of tarred ship-ropes
was drawing her back; and then, looking over her shoulder with her whole
brave, womanly heart in her swimming eyes, she put out her hand and
said, "Come along, Dave!"

And David straightway gat him up from the loafer's bench and went unto
Samantha gladly.

And they remembered not past unhappiness because of present joy; nor
that the chill of coming winter was in the air, because it was summer in
their hearts: and this is the eternal magic of love.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Timothy's Quest, by Kate Douglas Wiggin

