salesmen; men wanting newspaper interviews. From morning until night
the throng filed in and out of the office. Up to the present Mr. Curtis
had been content to remain in the security of his inner domain and rely
on his stenographer to fill many of the gaps. But with illness a change
had come and it was to Giusippe that most of these duties fell.

And yet, strangely enough, nothing had been further from the older
man's original plan than to transform this foreign-born lad into his
private secretary. But so it came about.

"I seem to just need you all the time, Giusippe," he declared one day.
"When you leave the house and return to your uncle's I am always
discovering something I meant to ask you and having to send the car
after you; and the moment you go back to your own job in the casting
department, without fail some matter comes up and you have to be
telephoned for. It is no use to try to get on without you. I need you
all the time. I need you here at home and I need you at the office."

Giusippe smiled.

"I'm glad if I can be of help to you, sir."

"You are of help; you are more than that--you are---- See here, what do
you say to throwing up your position at the works and coming into my
private office as my--well, as my general utility man? I've never had a
secretary--I've never wanted one; and if I had I never before have seen
the chap I'd trust with the job. But you are different. You're one of
the family, to begin with. Moreover, you've proved that you can be
trusted, and that you have some common sense. What would you take to
move into your room up-stairs for good and all, and live here where I
can get hold of you when I want you? Are you so wedded to your aunt and
uncle or to your work in the factory that you would be unwilling to
make the change?"

A flush suffused the boy's face.

"If you really think that I could do for you what you want done, Mr.
Curtis----"

"I don't think, I know!"

"Then I'd like to come, sir."

"That's right! It will be a weight off my mind. The doctor says that
for some months I must still go easy. You can save both my time and my
strength. I like you and I believe you like me; that is half the battle
in working with any one. We will send to your uncle's for your trunk
and whatever else you have."

"There isn't much else but some books," answered Giusippe. "I have been
buying a few from time to time as I could afford them."

"Box them up and send them over. Send everything. This is to be your
future home, you understand. And by the by, we'll give you that other
room adjoining your bedroom. You will need a bit more space. I will
have a desk and some book-shelves put in there."

"Thank you, sir."

"We'll call that settled, then. It is going to be very helpful to have
you right here on the spot. It is the person who aims to be of service
who is really valuable in the world. Look at Jean. In her way she has
been doing the same thing that you have. When she found I was in a hole
and needed her she gave up her vacation in the East without a murmur. I
sha'n't forget it, either. Come in, missy. I'm talking about you."

Jean, who had paused on the threshold of the room, entered smiling.

"You caught me at just the right moment, little lady. I was slandering
you," went on Mr. Curtis. "I was saying to Giusippe that I never again
can get on without you two young persons. Why, this old house was quiet
as the grave before you came into it. I cannot imagine how I ever
existed here alone all these years. The piano wasn't opened from one
end of the year to the other, and when I unlocked the door and came in
there wasn't a single sound anywhere. As I look back on it I guess I
spent about all my time at the Club. But since you came it has been
different. I've liked it a whole lot better, too. Now I feel as if I
really had a home."

Jean bent down and kissed him.

"When I get older," she said, "I mean that you shall have even a nicer
home. Fraeulein will be an old lady soon, Uncle Tom, and will not be
able to take care of things as she does now. Then I'm going to ask her
to teach me to market and to keep house. If you are to make Giusippe
your secretary it is only fair that you should give me a position, too.
I'll be your housekeeper. You'll see what a good one I shall make after
I've learned how. I should love to do it. A girl--a really, truly girl,
Uncle Tom, can't help wanting to keep house for somebody."

"No more she can, dear, and she ought to want to, too. It is her work
in the world to be a homemaker--the one who touches with comfort and
with beauty the lives of those about her. You shall be housekeeper for
Giusippe and me, little girl, and shall make out of these four walls a
real home. That is what your new Aunt Ethel is to do for your Uncle
Bob."

"I know it," answered Jean softly. "Even Uncle Bob couldn't get on
without some one to look after him, could he?"

"No," answered Mr. Curtis, "and it is fortunate he has found some one
if you are to be my housekeeper. If he makes any trouble we'll just
remind him that it was only your summers that you were to spend with
him. Your winters belong to me."

"I don't believe he will quarrel about it," was Jean's answer. "He
won't need me now, and he will understand that you do."

"I sure do," replied Uncle Tom, drawing the girl to his side. "I need
both of you--my boy and my girl."




The stories in this series are:

THE STORY OF COTTON
THE STORY OF GOLD AND SILVER
THE STORY OF LUMBER
THE STORY OF WOOL
THE STORY OF IRON
THE STORY OF LEATHER
THE STORY OF GLASS
THE STORY OF SUGAR






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Glass, by Sara Ware Bassett

