day, and so's the wife, _I_ know--ain't ye, Molly, my dear?"

To this appeal Mrs G replied with a hysterical ye-es, and an
application of her apron to the inflamed oysters.  Robin continued--

"Well, I'm sorry there ain't nothin' stronger in the fort to give 'ee
than tea, but for my part I find it strong enough to keep up my spirits,
an' yer all heartily welcome to swig buckets-full o' that.  There is an
old fiddle in the store.  If any o' ye can scrape a tune, we'll have a
dance.  If not, why we'll sing and be jolly."

This speech was followed up by another from Obadiah Stiff, who, with a
countenance of the deepest solemnity, requested permission to make a few
brief observations.

"Friends," said he, turning the quid of tobacco which usually graced his
right cheek into his left, "it's not every day a man's got a chance o'--
o' wot I was a-goin' to obsarve is, that men who are so much indebted to
their much-respected host as--as (Nelly happened to sneeze at this
point, and distracted Stiff's attention) as--yes, I guess we ha'nt often
got the chance to chase the redskins, and--and--.  In short, without
makin' an onnecessairy phrase about it--I'm happy to say that _I_ can
play the fiddle, so here's luck."

Mr Stiff sat down abruptly and drained his cup at a draught.

"Pr'aps," said Larry, with a twinkle in his eye, "Mister Stiff would
favour the company wi' a song before we commence to cut capers."

"Hear, hear!" from Walter.

"Hurrah!" from Roy.

Mr Stiff cleared his throat and began at once.  The tune was so
dolorous, and the voice so unmusical, that in any other circumstances it
would have been intolerable, but there were lines in it touching upon
"good fellowship," which partially redeemed it, and in the last verse
there was reference made to "home," and "absent friends," which rendered
it a complete success, insomuch that it was concluded amid rapturous
cheering, so true is it, as Walter observed, that, "one touch of nature
covers a multitude of sins!"

"Let's drink to absent friends an' owld Ireland," cried Larry, filling
his cup and pushing the kettle round.

This was drunk with enthusiasm and was followed by a succession of
toasts and songs, which were drunk and sung not at the table, but round
the fire, to which the party withdrew in order to enjoy their pipes more
thoroughly.  Then followed a number of anecdotes of stories--some true,
some doubtful, and some fabricated--which were listened to with deep
interest, not only by Roy and Nelly, but by the whole party, including
the Indians, who listened intently, with faces like owls, although they
did not understand a word that was said.

Many of these stories were so touching that poor Mrs Gore's eyes became
more inflamed and more oyster-like than ever.  Nelly, too, became
sympathetic, and her eyes were similarly affected.

When the evening was pretty well advanced, the violin was sent for and
tuned, and Stiff turned out to be a very fair player of Scotch reels; so
the party laid aside their pipes, cleared the floor, and began to dance.

It was rough but hearty dancing.  Each dancer composed his own steps on
the spur of the moment, but executed them with a degree of precision and
violence that would have caused civilised dancing masters to blush with
shame and envy.  Mrs Gore and Nelly danced too, weeping the while with
joy, and so did the White Swan, but her performances were peculiar.  She
danced with a slowness of manner and a rigidity of person that are
utterly indescribable.  She looked as if all her joints had become
inflexible, except those of her knees, and her arms hung straight down
at her sides, while she pendulated about the floor and gazed at the
rafters in deep solemnity.

How they did keep it up, to be sure!  Men of the backwoods find it no
easy matter to fatigue their muscles or exhaust their spirits, so they
danced all night, and a considerable portion of next morning too.  Long
before they gave in, however, the females were obliged to retire.  They
lay down on their rude couches without taking the trouble to undress,
and in a few moments after were sound asleep--Nelly locked in her
mother's arms, with their two cheeks touching, their dishevelled hair
mingling, and a few tears welling from their inflamed eyes, and mixing
as they flowed slowly down their united noses.  Sleeping thus, the
mother dreamed of home, and Nelly dreamed of Silver Lake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reader, our tale is told.  We have not space to tell of what befell
Robin Gore and his family in after life, but we may remark, in
conclusion, that although Robin stoutly refused to go back to
civilisation, in the course of a few years civilisation considerately
advanced to him, and the wild region, which was once a dense forest
around Fort Enterprise, finally became (to Mrs Gore's inexpressible
joy) a flourishing settlement, in which were heard the sounds of human
industry, and the tinkle of the Sabbath bell.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Silver Lake, by R.M. Ballantyne

