may give us a call."

Thus Simon O'Rook prosecuted his courtship.  In process of time he
married the widow, and was finally installed as master of the juvenile
Holly Tree in the suburbs, while his wife conducted the parent stem in
town.  Vegetables and other country produce had to be conveyed to the
town Tree regularly.  For this purpose a pony-cart was set up, which
travelled daily between it and the country branch.  Thus it came to pass
that O'Rook's Californian dreams were realised, for "sure," he was wont
to say, "haven't I got a house in the country an' a mansion in the town,
an' if I don't drive my carriage and four, I can always drive me cart
an' wan, anyhow, with a swate little widdy into the bargain."

It is, we suppose, almost superfluous to say that Doctor Jack and Polly
Samson were united in due course, but it is necessary to record that, by
special arrangement, Walter Wilkins, Esquire, and Susan Trench were
married on the same day.  More than that, the Doctor and Watty so
contrived matters that they rented a double villa in the suburbs of the
nameless city, one-half of which was occupied by Dr Jack's family, the
other by that of Wilkins.  Still further, it was so contrived by
Philosopher Jack that a small cottage was built on an eminence in his
garden, in which there was a room, precisely similar in all respects to
that in which he had first met his father-in-law.  There was a hammock
in this room, slung as the original hammock had been, and although the
old telescopes and sou'-westers and marine stores and charts had been
sold and lost past redemption, a good many new things, bearing a strong
resemblance to such articles, were purchased and placed on the walls and
in the corners, so that almost the only difference between it and the
old room was the absence of fishy smells.  There was an improvement,
also, in the view; for whereas, in the old room, the window commanded a
prospect of about ten yards in extent, comprising a brick wall, a
lamp-post, and a broken pump, the windows of the new room overlooked
miles and miles of landscape, embracing villages, hamlets, fields, and
forests, away to the horizon.

In this cottage Captain Samson took up his abode, rent free, and the
money which he was thus enabled to save, or which Jack insisted on his
saving, was spent in helping the poor all round his dwelling.  Here the
captain spent many happy hours in converse with Polly and her husband.
To this room, as time rolled on, he brought a small child, to which,
although not its nurse, he devoted much of his spare time, and called it
"Polly."

And oh! it was a wonderful sight to see Polly the second, with her heart
in her mouth and her hair flying in the air, riding the captain's foot
"in a storm!"

Here, too, as time continued to roll on, he fabricated innumerable boats
and ships for little boys, whose names were Teddie, Watty, Ben, Baldwin,
and such like.  In this room, also, every Sunday morning early, the
captain was to be found with a large, eager, attentive class of little
boys and girls, to whom he expounded the Word of God, with many an
illustrative anecdote, while he sought to lead them to that dear Lord
who had saved his soul, and whose Holy Spirit had enabled him to face
the battles of life, in prosperity and adversity, and had made him "more
than conqueror."  Here, also, in the evenings of the same holy day, he
was wont to gather a meeting of old people, to whom he discanted on the
same "old, old story."  In all which works he was aided and abetted by
the families of the double house close by.

Besides his constant visitors among the young, the aged, and the poor,
the captain had a few occasional visitors at his residence, which, by
the way, was named Harmony Hall.

Among these were Bailie Trench and his wife, who were naturally
attracted to that region by the presence there of a slender, loving,
sprightly boy, whose name was Benjamin Walter Wilkins, and who bore--at
least they thought he bore--a striking resemblance to their loved and
lost son Ben.  The family from the cottage on the Border also paid
annual visits to Number 1 of the double house (which was the Doctor's),
and the various members of that family, being very fond of a chat with
the old sailor, often found themselves of an evening in "the old
store-room" (as the boys styled it) of Harmony Hall.

These visits were regularly returned, chiefly in the summer-time, by the
captain and the families of the double house, on which occasions the
cottage on the Border was taxed to such an extent that Philosopher Jack
was obliged to purchase a neighbouring barn, which he had fitted up as a
dormitory that could accommodate almost a battalion of infantry.  During
these visits the trouting streams of the neighbourhood were so severely
whipped that the fish knew the difference between a real and an
artificial fly as well as their tormentors, but they were captured for
all that.

Baldwin Burr and Jacob Buckley were also among the occasional visitors
at the Hall; but their visits were few and far between, because of their
having taken up their permanent abode in California.  Only when they
came home on business, once in the two years, had they an opportunity of
seeing their old comrade, but they never failed to take advantage of
such opportunities.  These men were not prone to speak about themselves,
but from various remarks they made, and from their general appearance,
it was easy to see that they were substantial and influential members of
society in foreign parts.

From Baldwin the captain heard that Bob Corkey had, during his
wanderings, fallen in with Bounce and Badger, and that these three had
formed a partnership, in which they tried their luck at gold-digging,
farming, fur-trading, and many other sources of livelihood, but, up to
the last news of them, without success.  There was hope of them yet,
however, so thought Baldwin Burr, because of the latest remarks made by
them in the hearing of credible witnesses.  Bob Corkey, having attained
to the lowest depths of destitution and despair, had, it was said, made
to his comrades the following observation: "Mates, it strikes me that we
are three great fools;" whereupon Bounce had replied, "We're more than
that Bob, we're three great sinners;" to which Badger had added, with
considerable emphasis, "That's a fact," and when men come to this, there
is hope for them.

The only personage of our tale who now remains to be mentioned is Mrs
Niven.

That steady-going female continued her vocation of ministering to the
wants of young students, some of whom treated her well, while others--to
their shame, be it said--took advantage of her amiability.  In regard to
this latter fact, however, it may be recorded that Peggy proved a
sharp-witted, tight-handed, and zealous defender of her mistress.  Among
Mrs Niven's other boarders there was one who was neither young nor a
student.  He came to reside with her in the following manner:--

One evening Peggy was heard in altercation with a man in the passage who
seemed bent on forcing his way into the house.  The students who chanced
to be in their rooms at the time cocked their ears, like war-steeds
snuffing the battle from afar, and hoped for a row.  Mrs Niven, after
opening the parlour door softly, and listening, called out, "Let the
gentleman come up, Peggy."

"Gentleman indeed!" cried the irate Peggy, who had the intruder by the
throat, "he's only a dirty auld blagyird."

"Niver ye mind, Peggy," returned Mrs Niven peremptorily; "I ken him.
Let him up."

Immediately after, there walked into the parlour a bowed, mean-looking,
dirty little old man, who, as he sat down on a chair, paid some doubtful
compliments to Peggy.

"Oh, Maister Black, is it you!" said Mrs Niven, sitting down beside
him.

Besides being all that we have said, Mr Black was ragged, dishevelled,
haggard, and in every way disreputable.

"Yes, it's me, Mrs Niven," he replied harshly, "and you see I'm in a
sorry plight."

"I see, I see," said the good woman, taking his hand and shedding tears.
"I kent ye had lost a' by that fearfu' bank failure, but I didna ken ye
had come doon sae low.  And oh! to think that it was a' through me, an
your kindness in offerin' to tak the shares aff my hands.  Oh!  Maister
Black, my heart is wae when I look at ye.  Is there onything I can dae
for ye?"

Now, it was quite a new light to Mr Black that his relative had not
found him out.  He had called in a fit of desperation, for the purpose
of extorting money from her by any means.  He now changed his tactics,
and resolved to board and lodge with her gratuitously.  The proposition
rather startled the poor woman, for she found it difficult to make the
two ends meet, even when her house was full of lodgers.  She had not the
heart to refuse him, however, and thus Mr Black was fairly installed in
the old room whose window opened on the cats' parade.

In her difficulty Mrs Niven went, as she was in the habit of doing, to
Philosopher Jack, to whom she represented Mr Black as such a suffering
and self-sacrificing man, that his heart was quite melted.

"I'll tell you what I'll do, Mrs Niven," he said.  "There is a sum of
money in my father's possession, the interest of which enabled me to pay
my way when I came back from the gold-fields.  My father won't use that
money himself and I won't accept it from him.  We have therefore
resolved to devote it to charitable purposes.  Now, we will give Mr
Black a small annuity out of it, for your sake, Mrs Niven."

Philosopher Jack was not, however, so easily deceived as Mrs Niven.  He
afterwards "found out" Mr Black, and told him so in very stern
language.  Nevertheless, he did not stop his allowance.  Neither did he
enlighten Mrs Niven as to the man's true character, though he kept a
sharp eye on him.

Thus did Mr Black become a pensioner and a free boarder.  There is no
sinner on this side [of] the grave who is beyond redemption.  That which
prosperity and adversity had equally failed to accomplish, was finally
brought about by unmerited kindness,--Mr Black's spirit was quietly and
gradually, but surely, broken.  The generous forbearance of Edwin Jack,
and the loving Christian sympathy of his intended victim, proved too
much for him.  He confessed his sin to Jack, and offered to resign his
pension; but Jack would not hear of it, as the pensioner was by that
time too old and feeble to work.  He also confessed to Mrs Niven, but
that unsuspecting woman refused to believe that he ever did or could
harbour so vile a design towards her, and she continued in that mind to
her dying day.

Peggy, however, was made of sterner stuff.  She not only believed his
confession, but she refused to believe in his repentance, and continued
to treat him with marked disrespect until her mistress died.  After that
however, she relented, and retired with him to a poorer residence, in
the capacity of his servant.  Peggy was eccentric in her behaviour.
While she nursed him with the assiduous care and kindness of a rough but
honest nature, she continued to call him a "dirty auld blagyird" to the
last.  The expression of this sentiment did not, however, prevent her
from holding more polite intercourse.  When his eyes grew dim, she read
to him not only from the Bible, but from the Pilgrim's Progress and
Robinson Crusoe, which were their favourites among the books of the
little library furnished to them by Christian friends.  And many sage
and original remarks did Peggy make on those celebrated books.  The
topics of conversation which she broached with Mr Black from time to
time were numerous, as a matter of course, for Peggy was loquacious; but
that to which she most frequently recurred was the wonderful career of
Philosopher Jack, for Peggy liked to sing his praises, and never tired
of treating the old man to long-winded accounts of that hero's ever
memorable voyage to the Southern Seas.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosopher Jack, by R.M. Ballantyne

