Lumpy.  I'll answer for him!"

There was a general laugh at this, but Bob Lumsden, who was present,
chose to answer for himself, and said he was heartily willing.  So said
David Duffy, and so also said Joe Stubley.

"I on'y wish," added the latter, "that Jim Freeman was free to j'ine,
but Fred Martin's not likely to let _him_ go, for he's uncommon fond of
him."

"He's doin' good work for the Master where he is," returned Lockley,
"and we'll manage to catch as true and able a man among the North Sea
fleets afore long.  There's as good fish in the sea, you know, as ever
came out of it.  Our mission smack is to be called the _Welcome_."

"At this rate," observed Dick Martin, who was one of the party, "we'll
soon have a mission ship to every fleet in the North Sea; that'll please
our Director, won't it?"

"Ay, it will," said Lockley.  "All the same, I heard the Director say
only the other day, he wished people would remember that the mission
needed funds to keep the smacks a-goin' as well as to build an' launch
'em.  Howsever, we've no need to fear, for when the Master sends the men
and the work, He's sure to find the means."

Two weeks after the date on which this harmonious meeting was held, a
new vessel, laden with spiritual treasure, unfurled her sails, shook out
her MDSF ensign, and, amid the good wishes, silent prayers, and ringing
cheers of sympathetic friends on shore, went forth as a beacon of love
and light and hope to irradiate the toilers on the dark North Sea.

Among those cheering and praying ones were Mrs Mooney--a brand plucked
from the burning--and fragile Eve, with her weak, thin, helpless body
and her robust heart, chosen to do herculean and gladiator service of
sympathy and rescue in the Master's cause.  And you may be sure that
blooming Isa Martin was there, and her friend Martha Lockley; Manx
Bradley, the Admiral, who, with other fishermen, chanced to be having
their spell on shore at that time, was also there.  Even old Granny
Martin was there, in a sense, for she could see from her attic the great
blue flag as it fluttered in the breeze, and she called her unfailing--
and no longer ailing daughter to come to the window and look at it and
wish it God-speed; after which she turned her old eyes again to their
wonted resting-place, where the great sea rolled its crested breakers
beyond the sands.

It remains but to add that the _Welcome_ was received by the fleet to
which she was sent with an enthusiasm which fully justified her name,
and that her crew found her thenceforth, both as to her sea-going
qualities and the nature of her blessed work, a marvellous improvement
on their former home, the _Lively Poll_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  The Office of the Mission to Deep-Sea Fishermen is 181 Queen
Victoria Street, London, EC, at the date of publication of this book.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lively Poll, by R.M. Ballantyne

