"brought us into this place, and through your cowardice we come out of
it with disgrace. No guide had ye, nor sent scouts to explore, but
went blindly, even as beasts fall into a pit. As for us, we have been
overcome and yet have not suffered a wound or struck a blow." While they
thus murmured the time came when they must endure this great disgrace.
First they were bidden to come without the rampart, having no arms and
one garment only for each man. Afterwards the hostages were given up
and led away to prison. Then the lictors were commanded to leave the
Consuls; and these had their soldiers cloaks taken from them, so that
they who had just cursed them, crying out that they should be delivered
to the torturers, now pitied them, turning their eyes away, and thinking
not of their own condition for shame that the majesty of so high an
office should be so brought low. First the Consuls were sent under the
yoke, half naked, and after them the other officers, according to their
rank, and lastly the soldiers according to their legions. The enemy
stood about, mocking and reviling them; some they threatened with their
swords, and others that seemed to bear themselves too proudly they
wounded and even slew.

Then, going on their way, the Romans came near to Capua, but for shame
and for fear lest their allies should desert them, entered not the
city, but cast themselves down upon the road. But the men of Capua
had compassion on them, and sent to them all that they needed, and
entertained them both publicly and privately with all hospitality. But
the Romans answered not a word, nor so much as lifted up their eyes, so
overwhelmed were they with shame and grief. The next day certain young
noblemen of Capua, going with them to the borders of their country, made
this answer to some that questioned them in the Senate concerning
the behaviour of the Romans: "These men are wholly sunk in grief and
despair, and have lost not their arms only but also their courage.
Verily they seem to have yet on their necks the yoke under which they
were made to pass; and as for the Samnites, they have won a victory to
which there will be no end. The Gauls took the city of Rome, but these
men have taken the very courage of the Roman people." Then said a
certain Calavius, a man of renown and venerable for his age, "This
silence, this shame, this refusing of all comfort are signs of a wrath
that is both great and deep. If I know aught of the Roman people from
this silence will come loud lamentation to the Samnites."

Meanwhile these ill tidings had been carried to Rome. First they heard
that the army was besieged; after that there had been made this shameful
peace. Thereupon the soldiers, whom the magistrates had begun to levy on
news of the siege, were dismissed, and a public mourning made by common
consent. The shops were shut round the market-place, and also the courts
of the judges; and the magistrates laid aside their ornaments and gold
rings. At the first there was great wrath, not against the generals
alone, but also against the soldiers, whom they counted unworthy to be
admitted into the city; but when the army came in pitiable plight wrath
was changed to compassion.

So soon as the Consuls of the next year were appointed they called the
Senate to consider what should be done concerning the peace of Caudium.
And first they bade Postumius, that was one of the Consuls, speak his
mind. Then said Postumius (and as he spake he bare the same look that he
had borne under the yoke), "I hold that by this peace the Roman people
is not bound, seeing that it was made without their authority, but only
they that made themselves surety for it. Let us therefore be delivered
up to the Samnites naked and in chains by the heralds; so shall we
set free the people if they be in any wise bound. I hold also that the
Consuls should forthwith levy an army and march forth therewith, but
that they should not cross the border of the enemy till all these
things be duly finished. And I pray to the Gods of heaven that they be
satisfied with our disgrace, and that they prosper the arms of Rome even
as they have prospered them in time past."

To these words two tribunes of the Commons, having been among the
sureties, made objection, saying, "Ye cannot set the Roman people free
by giving up the sureties, but only by restoring all things as they were
at Caudium. Neither do we deserve punishment because we saved the army;
and seeing that we are sacred we may not be surrendered to the enemy."

To this Postumius made answer, "If this be so, men of Rome, give up us
that are common persons; and as for these sacred tribunes, touch them
not till their time of office be ended. Only, if ye will listen to
me, afterwards, before ye give them up, beat them with rods in the
market-place, and so take usury for the delay of payment. That the Roman
people are bound by this peace I deny. Think ye that they had been bound
if we had promised to surrender their city, their temples, their land,
their rivers, so that all that now belongs to the Romans should belong
to the Samnites? And if ye ask me why I made such a peace having no
authority, I answer this only. Nothing at Caudium was done wisely, but
all things foolishly. The Gods smote not us only, but also the enemy
with madness. We went blindly into the peril, and they cast away the
victory which they had won. For why did they not send ambassadors to
Rome, seeing that it was but a three days' journey, that peace might be
made in due form? Surely neither Fathers nor Commons are bound to that
in which they had no part. We that were sureties are bound, and we will
give ourselves up that they may work their will on us."

Even the tribunes of the Commons were persuaded by these words, so that
they abdicated their office, and were given to the heralds to be led to
Caudium together with the consuls and the other sureties. Thereupon the
heralds, going before, when they came to the gate, commanded that their
garments should be stripped from them that had been sureties for the
peace, and that their hands should be bound behind their backs. And when
the lictor, for reverence' sake, would have tied the cord loosely about
the hands of Postumius, Postumius said, "Nay, but bind tight the cord
that the matter may be done rightly." Afterwards, when they were come to
the judgment-seat of Pontius, the herald thus spake: "Forasmuch as these
men here present without bidding of the Roman people gave themselves
as sureties that a treaty should be made, and so did great wrong, I now
give up these men to you, that the Roman people may be set free
from guiltiness in this matter." While the herald was thus speaking,
Postumius with his knee smote him on the thigh with all his might,
saying, with a loud voice, "I am a citizen of Samnium, and thou art an
ambassador; I have smitten a herald contrary to the law of nations, so
that ye will wage war not without good cause."

Then said Pontius, "I accept not this surrender, neither I nor the
Samnites. If thou believest, Postumius, that there are gods, why dost
thou not either undo all that has been done or stand by thy covenant?
But I ask not this of thee, I ask it of the Roman people. If this peace
please them not, let them send back the legions to their place. Let all
that hath been done be undone. They shall have the arms which they gave
up. Then, if ye will, refuse this peace. Will ye never lack a cause for
going back from your word? Ye gave hostages to Porsenna and got them
back by stealth. Ye ransomed your State from the Gauls for gold, and
slew them even while ye paid it. Ye made peace with us that ye might get
back your legions that were taken, and now ye would disannul it. Is this
the law of nations, thou herald, as thou takest it to be? As for these
men, I accept them not. They may go back to their own country and carry
with them the wrath of the Gods whom they have despised. Ye will wage
war forsooth with us because Portumius hath struck the herald with his
knee. Ye will persuade the Gods that he is not a Roman but a Samnite,
and that therefore ye have just cause of war against us. Shame that old
men that have borne office should not be ashamed to work such mockeries
in the light of day, excusing themselves for their falsehood by such
tricks as verily children would count to be unworthy of them. Go,
lictor, loosen the bonds of the Romans; let no one hinder them from
going whither they will." So the Romans, having acquitted certainly
their own faith, and it may be the faith of the State, departed to their
own homes.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stories From Livy, by Alfred Church

