
During these years Donald had completed his school work; had taken his
four years at college; and loyal to his early ambition, had entered the
Law School. If it was a disappointment to his father for him to choose
the law instead of a business career Mr. Clark did not say so. He kept
closely in touch with the boy's studies and was proud of the future
before him.

It was just as everything seemed to be moving so ideally that the first
great calamity fell upon Clark & Sons. One morning a telegram came from
Sandy saying that a big fire had swept the ranch, leveling to the ground
house, barns, and sheep-pens. The blaze had come about through no one's
carelessness. Lightning had struck the central barn, and before aid
could be summoned the entire place had been destroyed.

Fortunately no one had been injured. The herders, together with their
flocks, were on the range; and the crops of alfalfa had not been cut and
were therefore saved.

"It might have been much worse, Don," said Mr. Clark in reviewing the
situation. "We have lost no men, no sheep, no hay, no wool. Suppose the
fire had come in shearing time and had destroyed all the fleeces; or
suppose the blaze had come about through carelessness and Sandy and
Douglas had had themselves to blame for it. As it is, it is nobody's
fault--I am glad of that--and nothing has been lost but can be restored.
The buildings are well covered by insurance and can be rebuilt during
the summer. The chief trouble is that all this has happened at a time
when I am very busy. I ought to go to Idaho, but I hardly see----"

"Can't I go, father?" interrupted Donald quickly. "I don't see why I
couldn't adjust the insurance and help about having new buildings put
up. Sandy and Douglas have good judgment, and before I started you could
tell me just what you want done. Besides," he added shyly, "I am now
through my first year at the Law School and have some little knowledge
of legal affairs--that is, I know more than I used to."

Mr. Clark beamed.

"You could go in my place perfectly well, Don, if you are willing to
give up your summer vacation to it. It would certainly be a great help.
But how about those house-parties you had planned for?"

"I can decline those, father. I'd be glad to go!" was Donald's reply. "I
always promised Sandy I would come West again some time, and I should
really enjoy another glimpse of the hills."

So it was arranged.

Within two days Donald was speeding West, and almost before he realized
it he was back at Crescent Ranch.

Then came letters for Mr. Clark.

The insurance was adjusted and with the aid of the McCullochs, Donald
was drawing up plans for new barns--barns with cement floors, and far
better ventilated and equipped than the old ones had been. Almost every
day brought to the Eastern office pages and pages of sketches for
sheep-folds and modern contrivances for lessening the labor of
wool-growing. Every line of these letters bubbled with enthusiasm. There
could be no possible question that Donald's heart was in every word he
wrote.

Summer passed and the time for the beginning of the college term drew
near.

Mr. Clark began to look for the boy's return.

Still there was no Donald!

Then came another letter:

                 _Crescent Ranch, Glen City, Idaho._

    DEAR FATHER:

    You have been so generous in letting me follow out my own wishes as
    to my future, that I hardly know how to write you. I hope you will
    not be disappointed when you hear what I am going to say. The fact
    is, dad, after thinking the matter well over I have changed my mind
    about studying law. I have become tremendously interested in
    Crescent Ranch and in wool-growing, and I am wild to jump into the
    work.

    If I thought you approved I should like to stay out here and see the
    buildings finished and then go to Kansas City with Sandy to select
    more sheep. If, however, you wish me to continue my law course I am
    perfectly willing to come East and take my degree.

    Please wire.

    Affectionately your son,
                  DONALD CLARK.

Donald's father read the letter twice. Then he called his stenographer.

"Lawson," he said briskly, "I want to dictate a telegram and have you
get it off right away. Here is the message:

    "_Mr. Donald Clark,
        Crescent Ranch, Glen City, Idaho._

    "Cut out the law. Take up sheeping. Three cheers for you!

    "(Signed) WILLARD PAYSON CLARK.

"Now repeat the message."

The stenographer did so.

Mr. Clark chuckled aloud.

"That is O. K., Lawson. Send it along as soon as possible. Oh, and
Lawson--here is a gold-piece which goes with that telegram. Keep it in
memory of this day, for it is the happiest one of my life. Mr. Donald is
coming into Clark & Sons!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Wool, by Sara Ware Bassett

