
Para Bruin, the rubber bear, climbed to a limb of the big tree, rolled
himself into a ball, and dropped to the platform, whence he bounded up
again to the limb.  He repeated this bouncing act several times, to the
great delight of all the children present.  After he had finished, and
bowed, and returned to his seat, Glinda waved her wand and the tree
disappeared; but its fruit still remained to be eaten.

The Good Witch of the North amused the people by transforming ten
stones into ten birds, the ten birds into ten lambs, and the ten lambs
into ten little girls, who gave a pretty dance and were then
transformed into ten stones again, just as they were in the beginning.

Johnny Dooit next came on the platform with his tool-chest, and in a
few minutes built a great flying machine; then put his chest in the
machine and the whole thing flew away together--Johnny and all--after
he had bid good-bye to those present and thanked the Princess for her
hospitality.

The Wizard then announced the last act of all, which was considered
really wonderful.  He had invented a machine to blow huge soap-bubbles,
as big as balloons, and this machine was hidden under the platform so
that only the rim of the big clay pipe to produce the bubbles showed
above the flooring.  The tank of soapsuds, and the air-pumps to inflate
the bubbles, were out of sight beneath, so that when the bubbles began
to grow upon the floor of the platform it really seemed like magic to
the people of Oz, who knew nothing about even the common soap-bubbles
that our children blow with a penny clay pipe and a basin of
soap-and-water.

The Wizard had invented another thing.  Usually, soap-bubbles are frail
and burst easily, lasting only a few moments as they float in the air;
but the Wizard added a sort of glue to his soapsuds, which made his
bubbles tough; and, as the glue dried rapidly when exposed to the air,
the Wizard's bubbles were strong enough to float for hours without
breaking.

He began by blowing--by means of his machinery and air-pumps--several
large bubbles which he allowed to float upward into the sky, where the
sunshine fell upon them and gave them iridescent hues that were most
beautiful.  This aroused much wonder and delight because it was a new
amusement to every one present--except perhaps Dorothy and
Button-Bright, and even they had never seen such big, strong bubbles
before.

The Wizard then blew a bunch of small bubbles and afterward blew a big
bubble around them so they were left in the center of it; then he
allowed the whole mass of pretty globes to float into the air and
disappear in the far distant sky.

"That is really fine!" declared Santa Claus, who loved toys and pretty
things.  "I think, Mr. Wizard, I shall have you blow a bubble around
me; then I can float away home and see the country spread out beneath
me as I travel.  There isn't a spot on earth that I haven't visited,
but I usually go in the night-time, riding behind my swift reindeer.
Here is a good chance to observe the country by daylight, while I am
riding slowly and at my ease."

"Do you think you will be able to guide the bubble?" asked the Wizard.

"Oh yes; I know enough magic to do that," replied Santa Claus.  "You
blow the bubble, with me inside of it, and I'll be sure to get home in
safety."

"Please send me home in a bubble, too!" begged the Queen of Merryland.

"Very well, madam; you shall try the journey first," politely answered
old Santa.

The pretty wax doll bade good-bye to the Princess Ozma and the others
and stood on the platform while the Wizard blew a big soap-bubble
around her.  When completed, he allowed the bubble to float slowly
upward, and there could be seen the little Queen of Merryland standing
in the middle of it and blowing kisses from her fingers to those below.
The bubble took a southerly direction, quickly floating out of sight.

"That's a very nice way to travel," said Princess Fluff.  "I'd like to
go home in a bubble, too."

So the Wizard blew a big bubble around Princess Fluff, and another
around King Bud, her brother, and a third one around Queen Zixi; and
soon these three bubbles had mounted into the sky and were floating off
in a group in the direction of the kingdom of Noland.

The success of these ventures induced the other guests from foreign
lands to undertake bubble journeys, also; so the Wizard put them one by
one inside his bubbles, and Santa Claus directed the way they should
go, because he knew exactly where everybody lived.

Finally, Button-Bright said:

"I want to go home, too."

"Why, so you shall!" cried Santa; "for I'm sure your father and mother
will be glad to see you again.  Mr. Wizard, please blow a big, fine
bubble for Button-Bright to ride in, and I'll agree to send him home to
his family as safe as safe can be."

"I'm sorry," said Dorothy with a sigh, for she was fond of her little
comrade; "but p'raps it's best for Button-Bright to get home; 'cause
his folks must be worrying just dreadful."

She kissed the boy, and Ozma kissed him, too, and all the others waved
their hands and said good-bye and wished him a pleasant journey.

"Are you glad to leave us, dear?" asked Dorothy, a little wistfully.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

He sat down cross-legged on the platform, with his sailor hat tipped
back on his head, and the Wizard blew a beautiful bubble all around him.

A minute later it had mounted into the sky, sailing toward the west,
and the last they saw of Button-Bright he was still sitting in the
middle of the shining globe and waving his sailor hat at those below.

"Will you ride in a bubble, or shall I send you and Toto home by means
of the Magic Belt?" the Princess asked Dorothy.

"Guess I'll use the Belt," replied the little girl.  "I'm sort of
'fraid of those bubbles."

"Bow-wow!" said Toto, approvingly.  He loved to bark at the bubbles as
they sailed away, but he didn't care to ride in one.

Santa Claus decided to go next.  He thanked Ozma for her hospitality
and wished her many happy returns of the day.  Then the Wizard blew a
bubble around his chubby little body and smaller bubbles around each of
his Ryls and Knooks.

As the kind and generous friend of children mounted into the air the
people all cheered at the top of their voices, for they loved Santa
Claus dearly; and the little man heard them through the walls of his
bubble and waved his hands in return as he smiled down upon them.  The
band played bravely while every one watched the bubble until it was
completely out of sight.

"How 'bout you, Polly?" Dorothy asked her friend.  "Are you 'fraid of
bubbles, too?"

"No," answered Polychrome, smiling; "but Santa Claus promised to speak
to my father as he passed through the sky.  So perhaps I shall get home
an easier way."

Indeed, the little maid had scarcely made this speech when a sudden
radiance filled the air, and while the people looked on in wonder the
end of a gorgeous rainbow slowly settled down upon the platform.

With a glad cry, the Rainbow's Daughter sprang from her seat and danced
along the curve of the bow, mounting gradually upward, while the folds
of her gauzy gown whirled and floated around her like a cloud and
blended with the colors of the rainbow itself.

"Good-bye Ozma!  Good-bye Dorothy!" cried a voice they knew belonged to
Polychrome; but now the little maiden's form had melted wholly into the
rainbow, and their eyes could no longer see her.

Suddenly, the end of the rainbow lifted and its colors slowly faded
like mist before a breeze.  Dorothy sighed deeply and turned to Ozma.

"I'm sorry to lose Polly," she said; "but I guess she's better off with
her father; 'cause even the Land of Oz couldn't be like home to a cloud
fairy."

"No indeed," replied the Princess; "but it has been delightful for us
to know Polychrome for a little while, and--who knows?--perhaps we may
meet the Rainbow's Daughter again, some day."

The entertainment being now ended, all left the pavilion and formed
their gay procession back to the Emerald City again.  Of Dorothy's
recent traveling companions only Toto and the shaggy man remained, and
Ozma had decided to allow the latter to live in Oz for a time, at
least.  If he proved honest and true she promised to let him live there
always, and the shaggy man was anxious to earn this reward.

They had a nice quiet dinner together and passed a pleasant evening
with the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, Tik-tok, and the Yellow Hen for
company.

When Dorothy bade them good-night, she kissed them all good-bye at the
same time.  For Ozma had agreed that while Dorothy slept she and Toto
should be transported by means of the Magic Belt to her own little bed
in the Kansas farm-house and the little girl laughed as she thought how
astonished Uncle Henry and Aunt Em would be when she came down to
breakfast with them next morning.

Quite content to have had so pleasant an adventure, and a little tired
by all the day's busy scenes, Dorothy clasped Toto in her arms and lay
down upon the pretty white bed in her room in Ozma's royal palace.

Presently she was sound asleep.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Road to Oz, by L. Frank Baum

