"Take that, you sneak!" shouted Banbury furiously.

"Hello!" exclaimed Bob Upton. "He knows his right name at last."

"I'll fix you," blubbered Gill, "you great big coward!"

"You shut up, or I'll give you worse," threatened Banbury. "A nice fellow
you are! Went and peached on me about that haystack."

"You lied to the professor about us, saying we had a hand in it," declared
Gill.

"Well, you've got me suspended, sent home, and I'll probably be expelled."

"You ought to be!" yelled Gill, as a twinge of pain made him howl anew. "It
was you who got me sick smoking cigarettes and thought it was funny. Yes,
and it was you, too," blabbed the mean-spirited traitor, "who put those
brads in Bob Upton's shoes, so he would lose the race."

"What?" shouted Dean Ritchie.

He made a vigorous break through the ranks of the crowd with the word. "The
cat was out of the bag" at last, the secret told. Banbury saw the doughty
Ritchie coming for him. He turned in a flash.

It was a race to the nearest school building. Banbury reached it first. The
other boys, running after pursued and pursuer, arrived at the spot to find
Banbury safe within the precincts of the classic temple of learning, and
Ritchie fuming at the open doorway.

"I say, let up, Ritchie," suggested Frank. "We've had enough squabbling."

"Not a bit of it," demurred Ritchie. "No, sir. I said that if ever I found
out who played that mean, low-down trick on Upton, the culprit or I would
leave this school."

"Well, it was Banbury, and he's going to leave, isn't he?" argued Frank.

"Yes; but I said that one of us would go the worst licked boy in Bellwood.
I mean to keep my word."

Remonstrances were in vain. With a grim, resolute face, Dean Ritchie took
up his post at the entrance to the academy, pacing up and down and waiting
for his chance to have another interview with Banbury.

It never came. Some of Banbury's crowd informed their leader of what was
waiting for him, and Banbury managed to sneak out of the school by the
rear, and reached the depot at Bellwood and was on his way home before
Ritchie found out that he had escaped.

"Well, let him go. A good riddance," commented Ritchie, when he was
informed of the fact. "His crowd needs a further cleaning out, though. I
suggest a law and order vigilance committee. There's going to be a rooting
up of all the cads and sneaks around here, if I have my way. This is a
decent school; we've got a grand old fatherly president, and the fellow who
can't have fun without meanness has got to leave, that's all."

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

"A box, you say?" observed Frank Jordan one day, as Bob Upton came up
calling.

"Yes," returned Bob excitedly.

"Just arrived?"

"While you were out on the campus. Came by express, and directed to Mr.
Frank Jordan, as big as life. What do you suppose it is?"

"Maybe some fruit from my folks in the South," suggested Frank. "What was
in the box?"

"It's light. I shook it--nothing to indicate."

"Where is it?"

"I took it up to your room. Hey, Ritchie, and you, Foreman--come and be
witnesses before Frank sneaks a box of goodies under cover."

The little group proceeded pell-mell up the stairs and were soon in Frank's
room. Eager, curious eyes observed a box about two feet square on a little
stand.

"There's holes in the top, and--hello! there's something alive in this box,
Frank," declared Bob.

"Yes, I can hear it scratching," put in Ritchie.

"Oho!" exclaimed Frank, enlightened now. "This end up--handle with care. I
know."

"Know what, Jordan?" inquired Ned.

But Frank did not answer. He had detached the shipping tag, and was reading
some words written on its reverse side.

"I am sending you my special pet, Rambo," the scrawl read, "because nothing
is too good for you. Highly educated, gentle. I know you'll be good to
him."

Frank recalled his new friend, Dave, with a smile of pleasure. He took the
cover off the box. Nestled contentedly in some soft hay at its bottom was a
wonder-eyed little monkey. Beside the animal was a thin, long chain.

To be sure, the boys made a lot of the cute little pet during the next
hour. The word went around, and Rambo held quite a reception. A drink of
water and a cracker put the animal in rare good humor, and he began to show
off.

Rambo would sit in a chair and hold a book, pretending to read. He could
whirl around, hanging by his tail from a hook in the ceiling. His agility,
displayed in springs, curvets and climbing, was something prodigious.

Frank arranged the box comfortably, and lots of fun they had with the
clever, friendly little animal.

Mace and his crowd, with their usual envy for the enjoyment of others,
complained finally that the chattering of the monkey awakened them nights.
This was not true, but obedient to the suggestion of the monitor, until the
faculty could act in the affair, Frank shut Rambo up in a room in the
unused attic nights, not wishing to trust him along with the other animals
in the academy stables.

This was a providential move, it developed later. The second night of
Rambo's isolation, toward morning, Frank was awakened by the crash of
glass. He got up to find that the monkey had burst in through the outside
window. Rambo was bleeding and shivering on the floor.

"Hello, this is strange!" exclaimed Bob, roused up also from sleep. "I say,
Frank, I smell smoke!"

"That's so," replied Frank quickly. "Where does it come from?"

They ran out into the corridor, to quickly trace the smoke to its source.
It evidently proceeded from the attic. Rushing there, Frank and Bob found
some rafters on fire. They had evidently ignited near the chimney.

Rambo, it seemed, frightened at his danger, had broken through the attic
window and had reached the boys' room in time to warn them. The fire was
soon extinguished, but it might have been serious had it not been
discovered in time.

That settled it for useful, vigilant Rambo. He was given permanent quarters
in Frank's room, and was treated like a hero by the academy boys.

Another box came to Frank a few days later--from his father in the sunny
South. It was filled with oranges, pineapples and other luscious fruits,
and there was a gay supper in Frank's room that night. Even Gill Mace and
his crowd were invited, and little Rambo was an honored guest at the
banquet.

Frank felt that the disturbed air of the academy was clearing. Certainly
his own affairs and those of Ned Foreman had come out most satisfactorily.

Samuel Mace had been convinced that Frank was innocent of any connection
with the theft of the diamond bracelet. He had started out the officers of
Bellwood to look up the real robbers, Tim Brady and his accomplice, the man
Jem.

These two rascals had got an inkling of what was up and had fled the
country--not, however, until they had disposed of the bracelet to an
innocent purchaser. The jeweler had to pay out a large sum of money to
recover it.

Gill Mace was compelled to retract in public his false charge against
Frank, and the vindication of the latter was made complete. Then, to the
surprise of our hero, came word from Banbury that Gill had once boasted of
cutting loose a house that was being moved up a hill, using Frank's knife
for that purpose and thereby getting our hero in trouble. This matter was
investigated, and in the end Samuel Mace had to pay for the wrecking of the
old building. This angered the jeweler, and he punished his nephew severely
for his misconduct.

A pleasant position on a farm was secured for the man called Dan, who
promised to lead an honest life in the future.

As to Ned, the homeless lad felt that the greatest happiness in the world
had come into his life. The lawyer, Grimm, had been frightened into telling
all about Brady's plot. The estate that belonged to Ned was traced, and
Professor Elliott was legally made the boy's guardian.

The academy president called Frank, Ned and Bob to his office one evening,
and informed them of the pleasant outcome of their affairs.

"Just think of it," said Ned, with happy tears in his eyes. "I'm sure of an
education now, and all through the loyal friendship of the best boy I ever
knew, Frank Jordan."

"I echo that sentiment," added Bob. "Why, say, I didn't know life was
really worth living till I met Frank."

"Forget it, fellows," ordered Frank modestly, though flushing with genuine
pleasure. "You may help me to win some battles yet."

"Jordan," spoke the bland old professor, handing a sealed letter to Frank,
"you may feel very proud sending that letter to your father. It tells all
the good things I know about a noble, honorable boy."

"Well, professor," replied Frank, "we've made you a good deal of trouble.
Now we're going to get down to good hard work."

"And play," added Professor Elliott, with the kindly, earnest smile that
made him the true friend of the boys of Bellwood School.




THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's The Boys of Bellwood School, by Frank V. Webster

