daughter to the man who should conquer the enemy.

The little cobbler, riding upon a white horse, commanded the king's
army.

What a queer leader he was! About his shoulders was thrown the bear's
skin, held firmly by the wonderful girdle, and in one hand he carried
the giant's club.

When the enemy advanced, and the leader saw the queer commander of the
king's army, he smiled and said, "We have little to fear from such a
commander."

Then he saw the curious girdle and read the words:

   Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow.

"Is it possible that this little man can kill TEN COMMANDERS at one
blow?" thought the leader.

He turned his horse quickly and gave orders for the army to retreat.

The cobbler followed the enemy and soon overtook the leader, whom he
made prisoner.

When the king saw the cobbler returning with the leader, he was
delighted. But all at once he remembered the reward that he had promised
to the victor.

The princess refused to become the bride of one so small and so ugly as
the cobbler.

"What shall I do?" asked the king. "A king should never break his
promise."

Then the princess whispered to the king, "Try to take the little man's
girdle from him. He will then lose his power."

So the king said to the cobbler, "You may have the hand of the princess
if you will give your girdle to me."

This made the cobbler very unhappy, for he knew what good fortune the
girdle had brought to him.

But he smiled and answered in a cheerful voice.

"I shall be honored, if your majesty will accept my girdle."

He handed the precious girdle to the king.

At that moment, something wonderful happened.

Instead of an ugly little man, there stood a tall, handsome youth.

The princess was very willing to become the bride of so handsome a
youth. The king now gladly gave his consent to the marriage.

Next day a great wedding feast was spread in honor of the marriage.

After the king's death, the princess and her husband ruled the country.

The magic girdle was placed over the throne.

Ever afterwards, when the new king and queen appeared, the people would
shout with great pride,

  "Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow."










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Story Hour Readers — Book Three, by 
Ida Coe and Alice Christie Dillon

