
"I have done as well as I knew," he reiterated. "Would that it had
been my own boy instead of his!"

Over and over he planned to himself what he would say at that
crucial meeting. He would explain as nearly as he could the precise
conditions that he felt justified him in assuming the immense
financial responsibilities he had heaped up for his former friend.
If the lad lived it would be worth it all; but if he did not it
would all have gone for naught. Would not any father rather have had
his child alive, invalid though he was, than to have lost him
altogether?

The meeting when it came was quite different from anything Mr.
Carlton had outlined. It was after midnight when the special arrived
at the dim little station, and even before the train came to a stop
its solitary passenger sprang impatiently to the platform.

There was no need for James Carlton to make certain who it was;
every line of the form was familiar. He strode to the traveler's
side.

The hands of the two men shot out and met in a firm clasp.

"The boy?"

"He is alive, Asa."

"God bless you, Jim!"

Van Blake faced the great crisis, fought his way courageously
through it, and won.

Slowly he retraced his steps up the path to health again, and as
soon as he was able to be moved he and his father and mother
together with the Carltons went to Allenville and opened the old
farmhouse for Christmas.

What a Christmas it was!

What a day of rejoicing and thanksgiving among young and old!

Tim McGrew and all his family were brought down for a holiday, and
there was a royal tree decked with candles and loaded with gifts;
there was a pudding which could nowhere have been matched; a
southern plum-pudding made by Van's mother; there were carols sung
as only those to whom they meant much could sing them; and there was
joy and peace in every heart.

"Next summer it must be Colorado for you all, Jim," cried Asa Blake
as he stood with his hand on the shoulder of his old partner. "We'll
make this New Year the happiest of our lives. Tim shall go too; and
if money can buy surgical skill he shall make the journey hither on
his own two feet. Here's to the new year, Jim!"

"The new year, Asa, and may God bless us every one!" echoed Mr.
Carlton, softly.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Sugar, by Sara Ware Bassett

