But morally, this plea, however sincerely urged, is more or less
unconscious self-deception. The person who says 'Suffer me first' is
usually hoodwinking conscience, and covering over, if not a
determination not to do, at least a reluctance to determine to do, the
postponed duty. And although we may think ourselves quite resolved in
spirit, and only needing the fitting vacant space to show that we are
ready to act, in the majority of cases the man who says 'Suffer me
first' means, though he often does not know it, 'I do not think I will
do it, after all, even then.' Now there are a great many good people
who, when urged to some of the plain duties of discipleship--such as
Christian work, Christian beneficence, the consecration of themselves to
the service of their Master--have always something else very important,
and of immediate, pressing urgency, that has to be done first. And then
and then, ay? and then,--something else, and then--something else. And
so some of you go on, and will go on, unless by God's grace you shake
off the evil habit, to the end of your days, fancying yourselves
disciples, and yet all the while delaying really to follow the Master
until the close. And 'all your yesterdays will be but lighting you, with
unfulfilled purposes, to dusty death.'

II. Now look at the apparently harsh and unreasonable refusal of this
reasonable request.

It is extremely unlike Jesus Christ in substance and in tone. It is
unlike Him to put any barrier in the way of a son's yielding to the
impulses of his heart and attending to the last duties to his father. It
is extremely unlike Him to couch His refusal in words that sound, at
first hearing, so harsh and contemptuous, and that seem to say, 'Let the
dead world go as it will; never you mind it, do you not go after it at
all or care about it.'

But if we remember that it is Jesus Christ, who came to bring life into
the dead world, who says this, then, I think, we shall understand better
what He means. I do not need to explain, I suppose, that by the one
'dead' here is meant the physical and natural 'dead,' and by the other
the morally and religiously 'dead'; and that what Christ says, in the
picturesque way that He so often affected in order to bring great truths
home in concrete form to sluggish understandings, is in effect, 'Nay!
For the men in the world that are separated from God, and so are dead in
their selfhood and their sin, burying other dead people is appropriate
work. But your business, as living by Me, is to carry life, and let the
burying alone, to be done by the dead people that can do nothing else.'

Now the spirit of our Lord's answer may be put thus:--It must always be
Christ first, and every one else second; and it must therefore sometimes
be Christ _only_, and no one else. 'Let me bury my father and then I
will come.' 'No,' says Christ; 'first your duty to Me': first in order
and time, because first in order of importance. And this is His habitual
tone, 'He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of
Me.'

Did you ever think of what a strange claim that is for a _man_ to make
upon others? This Jesus Christ comes to you and me, and to every man,
and says, 'I demand, and I have a right to demand, thy supreme affection
and thy first obedience. All other relations are subordinate to thy
relation to Me. All other persons ought to be less dear to thee than I
am. No other duty can be so imperative as the duty of following Me.'
What right has He to speak thus to us? On what does such a tremendous
claim rest? Who is it that fronts humanity and says, 'He that loveth
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me'? He had a right to
say it, because He is more than they, and has done more than they,
because He is the Son of God manifest in the flesh, and because on the
Cross He has died for all men. Therefore all other claims dwindle and
sink into nothingness before His. Therefore His will is supreme, and our
relation to Him is the dominant fact in our whole moral and religious
character. He must be first, whoever comes second, and between the first
and the second there is a great gulf fixed.

Remember that this postponing of all other duties, relationships, and
claims to Christ's claims and relationships, and to our duties to Him,
lifts them up, and does not lower them; exalts, and does not degrade,
the earthly affections. They are nobler and loftier, being second, than
when perversely, and, in the literal sense, _preposterously_, they
assume to be first. The little hills in the foreground are never so
green and fair as when they are looked at in connection with the great
white Alps that tower behind them; and all earthly loves and
relationships catch a tinge of more ethereal beauty, and are lifted into
a loftier region, when they are rigidly subordinated to our love to Him.
Being second, they are more than when they bragged that they were first.

Again, if it must be Christ first, and everybody and everything besides
second, then to carry that out, it will often have to be Christ only,
and no one else. There will come in every man's life the need for a
sharp decision between conflicting allegiances. Life is full of harsh
alternatives, and it is of no use to kick against the pricks. The
divine order is Jesus first and all things second. But we sometimes
break that order, and then it comes to be, 'Very well, then, if you
cannot keep the lower in their right places, you must learn to do
without them altogether; and if you will not have Him first and them
second, you must not have them at all.' 'If thine eye offend thee, pluck
it out,' it would be far better for thee to keep it without offence. 'If
thine hand offend thee,' put it down on the block, and take the cleaver
in the other hand, and off with it, it would be better for thee to go
into life whole than maimed, but it is better to go into life maimed,
than to go into destruction whole. The abandonment of the father's bier
is second best; but it is sometimes imperative. When you find a taste, a
pursuit, a study, an occupation, a recreation coming between you and
Jesus Christ--when you do not know how it is, but, somehow or other, the
sky that was blue a minute or two ago has a doleful veil of grey
creeping all over it, be sure that something or other which ought to be
under has got topmost, and you will have to get rid of it in order to
come right again. If this man would certainly have come back had Jesus
let him go, he would have been let go; but because Jesus knew that he
would not come back, therefore He said, 'You must deny your natural
affection, because it is coming between you and Me.'

So, dear brethren, when we find that earthly duties, pursuits,
occupations of any kind, affections, pure and beautiful as in themselves
they may be, are hindering our following the Master, then, if they are
things of which we can denude ourselves, though it be at a distinct
sacrifice, we are bound to do so; or else we are not loving the Master
more than all besides.

Let me remind you in closing of the variation in this story which the
evangelist Luke gives us. He interprets Christ's commandment, 'Follow
Me,' and expands it into 'preach the Gospel,' which was involved in it.
There are many of you who are busily engaged in legitimate occupations,
and devoting yourselves in various degrees to various forms of
beneficence touching the secular condition of the people around us. May
I hint to such, 'Let the dead bury their dead; preach thou the gospel?'
A Christian man's first business is to witness for Jesus Christ, and no
amount of diligence in legitimate occupations or in work for the good
of others will absolve him from the charge of having turned duties
upside down, if he says, 'I cannot witness for Jesus Christ, for I am so
busy about these other things.' This command has a special application
to us ministers. There are hosts of admirable things that we are tempted
to engage in nowadays, with the enlarged opportunities that we have of
influencing men, socially, politically, intellectually, and it wants
rigid concentration for us to keep out of the paths which might hinder
our usefulness, or, at all events, dissipate our strength. Let us hear
that ringing voice ringing always in our ears, 'Preach thou the gospel
of the kingdom.'


THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE NATURAL WORLD

     'And when He was entered into a ship, His disciples followed Him.
     24. And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
     that the ship was covered with the waves; but He was asleep. 25.
     And His disciples came to Him, and awoke Him, saying, Lord, save
     us: we perish. 26. And He saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye
     of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea,
     and there was a great calm. 27. But the men marvelled, saying, What
     manner of man la this, that even the winds and the sea obey
     him!'--MATT. viii. 23-27.

The second group of miracles in these chapters shows us Christ as the
Prince of Peace, and that in three regions--the material, the
superhuman, and the moral. He stills the tempest, casts out demons, and
forgives sins, thus quieting nature, spirit, and conscience.

Mountain-girdled lakes are exposed to sudden storms from the wind
sweeping down the glens. Such a one comes roaring down as the little
boat, probably belonging to James and John, is labouring across the six
or seven miles to the eastern side. Matthew describes the boat as it
would appear from shore, as being 'covered' and lost to sight by the
breaking waves. Mark, who is Peter's mouthpiece, describes the desperate
plight as one on board knew it, and says the boat was 'filling.' It must
have been a serious gale which frightened a crew who had spent all their
lives on the lake.

Note Christ's sleep in the storm. His calm slumber is contrasted with
the hurly-burly of the tempest and the alarm of the crew. It was the
sleep of physical exhaustion after a hard day's work. He was too tired
to keep awake, or to be disturbed by the tumult. His fatigue is a sign
of His true manhood, of His toil up to the very edge of His strength; a
characteristic of His life of service, which we do not make as prominent
in our thoughts as we should. It is also a sign of His calm conscience
and pure heart. Jonah slept through the storm because his conscience was
stupefied; but Christ, as a tired child laying its head on its mother's
lap.

That sleep may have a symbolical meaning for us. Though Christ is
present, the storm comes, and He sleeps through it. Lazarus dies, and He
makes no sign of sympathy. Peter lies in prison, and not till the
hammers of the carpenters putting up the gibbet for to-morrow are heard,
does deliverance come. He delays His help, that He may try our faith and
quicken our prayers. The boat may be covered with the waves, and He
sleeps on, but He will wake before it sinks. He sleeps, but He never
over-sleeps, and there are no too-lates with Him.

Note next the awaking cry of fear. The broken abruptness of their appeal
reveals the urgency of the case in the experienced eyes of these
fishermen. Their summons is a curious mixture of fear and faith. 'Save
us' is the language of faith; 'we perish' is that of fear. That strange
blending of opposites is often repeated by us. The office of faith is to
suppress fear. But the origin of faith is often in fear, and we are
driven to trust just because we are so much afraid. A faith which does
not wholly suppress fear may still be most real; and the highest faith
has ever the consciousness that unless Christ help, and that speedily,
we perish.

So note next the gentle remonstrance. There is something very majestic
in the tranquillity of our Lord's awaking, and, if we follow Matthew's
order, in His addressing Himself first to the disciples' weakness, and
letting the storm rage on. It can do no harm, and for the present may
blow as it listeth, while He gives the trembling disciples a lesson.
Observe how lovingly our Lord meets an imperfect faith. He has no rebuke
for their rude awaking of Him. He does not find fault with them for
being 'fearful,' but for being 'so fearful' as to let fear cover faith,
just as the waves were doing the boat. He pityingly recognises the
struggle in their souls, and their possession of some spark of faith
which He would fain blow into a flame. He shows them and us the reason
for overwhelming fear as being a deficiency in faith. And He casts all
into the form of a question, thus softening rebuke, and calming their
terrors by the appeal to their common sense. Fear is irrational if we
can exercise faith. It is mere bravado to say 'I will not be afraid,'
for this awful universe is full of occasions for just terror; but it is
the voice of sober reason which says 'I will trust, and not be afraid.'
Christ answers His own question in the act of putting it,--ye are of
little faith, that is why ye are so fearful.

Note, next, the word that calms the storm. Christ yields to the cry of
an imperfect faith, and so strengthens it. If He did not, what would
become of any of us? He does not quench the dimly burning wick, but
tends it and feeds it with oil--by His inward gifts and by His answers
to prayer--till it burns up clear and smokeless, a faith without fear.
Even smoke needs but a higher temperature to flame; and fear which is
mingled with faith needs but a little more heat to be converted into
radiance of trust. That is precisely what Christ does by this miracle.
His royal word is all-powerful. We see Him rising in the stern of the
fishing-boat, and sending His voice into the howling darkness, and wind
and waves cower at His feet like dogs that know their master. As in the
healing of the centurion's servant, we have the token of divinity in
that His bare word is able to produce effects in the natural realm. As
He lay asleep He showed the weakness of manhood; but He woke to manifest
the power of indwelling divinity. So it is always in His life, where,
side by side with the signs of humiliation and participation in man's
weakness, we ever have tokens of His divinity breaking through the veil.
All this power is put forth at the cry of timid men. The storm was meant
to move to terror; terror was meant to evoke the miracle--the result was
complete and immediate. No after-swell disturbed the placid waters when
the wind dropped. There had been 'a great tempest,' and now there was 'a
great calm,' as the fishermen floated peacefully to their landing-place
beneath the shadow of the hills. The wilder the tempest, the profounder
the subsequent repose.

All this is a true symbol of our individual lives, as well as of the
history of the Church. Storms will come, and He may seem to be heedless.
He is ever awakened by our cry, which needs not to be pure faith in
order to bring the answer, but may be strangely intertwined of faith and
fear. 'The Lord will help ... and that right early,' and the peace that
He brings is peace indeed. So it may be with us amid the struggles of
life. So may it be with us when the voyage on this storm-tossed sea of
time is done! 'They cry unto the Lord in their trouble. He maketh the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad
because they be quiet; so He bringeth them unto their desired haven.'


THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD

     'And when He was come to the other side into the country of the
     Gergesenes, there met Him two possessed with devils, coming out of
     the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
     29. And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with
     Thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art Thou come hither to torment us
     before the time? 30. And there was a good way off from them an herd
     of many swine feeding. 31. So the devils besought Him, saying, If
     Thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. 32.
     And He said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went
     into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran
     violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the
     waters. 33. And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into
     the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the
     possessed of the devils. 34. And, behold, the whole city came out
     to meet Jesus: and when they saw Him, they besought Him that He
     would depart out of their coasts.'--MATT. viii. 28-34.

Matthew keeps to chronological order in the first and second miracles of
the second triplet, but probably His reason for bringing them together
was rather similarity in their contents than proximity in their time.
For one cannot but feel that the stilling of the storm, which manifested
Jesus as the Peace-bringer in the realm of the Natural, is fitly
followed by the casting out of demons, which showed Him as the Lord of
still wider and darker realms, and the Peace-bringer to spirits tortured
and torn by a mysterious tyranny. His meek power sways all creatures;
His 'word runneth very swiftly.' Winds and seas and demons hearken and
obey. Cheap ridicule has been plentifully flung at this miracle, and
some defenders of the Gospels have tried to explain it away, and have
almost apologised for it, but, while it raises difficult problems in its
details, the total effect of it is to present a sublime conception of
Jesus and of His absolute, universal authority. The conception is
heightened in sublimity when the two adjacent miracles are contemplated
in connection.

There is singular variation in the readings of the name of the scene of
the miracle in the three evangelists. According to the reading of the
Authorised Version, Matthew locates it in the 'country of the
Gergesenes'; Mark and Luke, in the 'country of the Gadarenes'; whereas
the Revised Version, following the general consensus of textual critics,
reads 'Gadarenes' in Matthew and 'Gerasenes' in Mark and Luke. Now,
Gadara is over six miles from the lake, and the deep gorge of a river
lies between, so that it is out of the question as the scene of the
miracle. But the only Gerasa known, till lately, is even more
impossible, for it is far to the east of the lake. But some years since,
Thomson found ruins bearing the name of Khersa or Gersa, 'at the only
portion of that coast on which the steep hills come down to the shore'
(Smith, Historical Geography of the Holy Land, p. 459). This is probably
the site of the miracle, and may have been included in the territory
dependent on Gadara, and so have been rightly described as in 'the
country of the Gadarenes.'

Matthew again abbreviates, omitting many of the most striking and solemn
features of the narrative as given by the other two evangelists, and he
also diverges from them in mentioning two demoniacs instead of one. That
is not contradiction, for if there were two, there was one, but it is
divergence, due to more accurate information. Whether they were meant so
or no, the abbreviations have the striking result that Jesus speaks but
one word, the permissive 'Go,' and that thus His simple presence is the
potent spell before which the demons cower and flee. They know Him as
'the Son of God'; a name which, on their lips, must be taken in its full
significance. If demoniacal possession is a fact, there is no difficulty
in accounting for the name here given to Jesus, nor for the sudden
change from the fierce purpose of barring an intruder's path to abject
submission. If it is not a fact, to make a plausible explanation of
either circumstance will be a task needing many contortions, as is seen
by the attempts to achieve it. For example, we are told that the
demoniacs were afraid of Jesus, because He 'was not afraid of them,' and
they knew Him, because 'men with shattered reason also felt the spell,
while the wise and the strong-minded often used their intellect, under
the force of passion or prejudice, to resist the force of truth.'
Possibly the last clause goes as far to explain some critics'
non-recognition of demoniacal possession as the first does to explain
the demoniacs' recognition of Jesus!

To the demonic nature Christ's coming brought torture, as the sunbeam,
which gives life to many, also gives death to ugly creatures that crawl
and swarm in the dark. Turn up a stone, and the creeping things hurry
out of the penetrating glare so unwelcome. 'What maketh heaven, that
maketh hell,' and the same presence is life or death, joy or agony. The
dear perception of divine purity and the shuddering recoil of impotent
hatred from it are surely of the very essence of the demonic nature, and
every man, who looks into the depths of his own spirit, knows that the
possibilities of such a state are in him.

Our Lord discriminated between healing the sick and casting out demons.
He distinguished between forms of disease due to possession and the same
diseases when dissociated from it, as, for example, cases of dumbness.
His whole attitude, both in His actual dealing with the possessed and in
His referring to the subject, gave His complete adhesion to the reality
of the awful thing. It is vain to say that He humoured the delusions of
insanity in order to cure them. That theory does not adequately explain
any of the facts and does not touch some of them. It is perilous to try
to weaken the force of the narrative by saying that the evangelists were
under the influence of popular notions (which are quietly assumed to
have been wrong), and hence that their prepossessions coloured their
representations. If the mirror was so distorted, what reliance can be
placed on any part of its reflection of Jesus? There can be no doubt
that the Gospel narrative asserts and assumes the reality of demoniacal
possession, and if the representation that Jesus also assumed it is due
to the evangelists, what trust can be reposed in authorities which
misrepresent Him in such a matter? On the other hand, if they do not
misrepresent Him, and He blundered, confounding mere insanity with
possession by a demon, what reliance can be reposed in Him as our
Teacher of the Unseen World? The issues involved are very grave and
far-reaching, and raillery or sarcasm is out of place.

But the question is pertinent: By what right do we allege that
demoniacal possession is an exploded figment and an impossibility? Do we
know ourselves or our fellows so thoroughly as to be warranted in
denying that deep down in the mysterious 'subliminal consciousness'
there is a gate through which spiritual beings may come into contact
with human personalities? He would be bold, to the verge of presumption
or somewhat further, who should take up such a position. And have we any
better right to assume that we know so much of the universe as to be
sure that there are no evil spirits there, who can come into contact
with human spirits and wield an alien tyranny over them? The Christian
attitude is not that of such far-reaching denial which outruns our
knowledge, but that of calm belief that Jesus is the head of all
principality and power, and that to Him all are subject. It is taken for
granted that the supposed possession is insanity. But may it not rather
be that to-day some of the supposed insanity is possession? Be that as
it may--and perhaps those who have the widest experience of 'lunatics'
would be the least ready to dismiss the possibility,--Jesus recognised
the reality that there were souls oppressed by a real personality, which
had settled itself in the house of life, and none of us has wide and
deep enough knowledge to contradict Him. Might it not be better to
accept His witness in this, as in other matters beyond our ken, as true,
and to ponder it?

The demons' petition, according to the Received Text, takes the form,
'Suffer us to go,' while the reading adopted by most modern editors is
'Send us.' The former reading seems to be taken from Luke (viii. 32),
while Mark has 'Send' (not the same word as now read in Matthew). But
Mark goes on to say, not that Jesus sent them, but that He 'suffered
them' or 'gave them leave' (the same word as in Matthew, according to
the Received Text). Thus, Jesus' part in the transaction is simply
permissive, and the one word which He speaks is authoritative indeed in
its curtness, and means simply 'away,' or 'begone.' It casts them out
but does not send them in. He did not send them into the herd, but out
of the men, and did not prevent their entrance into the swine. It should
further be noted that nothing in the narrative suggests that the
destruction of the herd was designed even by the demons, much less by
Jesus. The maddened brutes rushed straight before them, not knowing why
or where; the steep slope was in front, and the sea was at its foot, and
their terrified, short gallop ended there. The last thing the demons
would have done would have been to banish themselves, as the death of
the swine did banish them, from their new shelter. There is no need,
then, to invent justifications for Christ's destroying the herd, for He
did not destroy it. No doubt, keeping swine was a breach of Jewish law;
no doubt the two demoniacs and the bystanders would be more convinced of
the reality of the exorcism by the fate of the swine, but these
apologies are needless.

The narrative suggests some affinity between the demoniac and the animal
nature, and though it is easy to ridicule, it is impossible to disprove,
the suggestion. We know too little about either to do that, and what we
cannot disprove it is somewhat venturesome hardily to deny. There are
depths in the one nature, which we cannot fathom though its possessors
are close to us; the other is removed from our investigation altogether.
Where we are so utterly ignorant we had better neither affirm nor deny.
But we may take a homiletical use out of that apparent affinity, and
recognise that a spirit in rebellion against God necessarily gravitates
downwards, and becomes more or less bestialised.

No wonder that the swineherds fled, but, surely, it is a wonder that
eagerness to be rid of Jesus was the sole result of the miracle. Perhaps
the reason was the loss of the swine, which would bulk largest in their
keepers' excited story; perhaps the reason was a fear that He would find
out and rebuke other instances of breach of strict Jewish propriety,
perhaps it was simply the shrinking from any close contact with the
heavenly, or apparently supernatural, which is so instinctive in us, and
witnesses to a dormant consciousness of discord with Heaven. 'Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man,' is the cry of the roused conscience.
And, alas! it has power to send away Him whom we need, and who comes to
us, just because we are sinful, and just that He may deliver us from our
sin.


END OF VOL. I






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture
by Alexander Maclaren

