is that a Christian man is to be an echo of the Lord's good confession,
and is to keep within the lines of it, and to be sure that all of it is
echoed in his life. Christ has told us what to say, and we are here to
say it over again. Christ has witnessed; we are to confess. Our relation
to that truth is different from His. We hear it; He speaks it. We accept
it; He reveals it. We are influenced by it; He _is_ it. He brings it to
the world on His own authority; we are to carry it to the world on His.

Be sure that you Christian men are echoes of your Master. Be sure that
you reverberate the note that He struck. Be sure that all its music is
repeated by you And take care that you neither fall short of it, nor go
beyond it, in your faith and in your profession. Echoes of Christ--that
is the highest conception of a Christian life.

But though there is all the difference between the Witness and the
confessors, do not let us forget that, if we are truly Christian, there
is a very deep and blessed sense in which we, too, may witness what we
have seen and heard. A Christian preacher of any sort--and by that I
mean, not merely a man who stands in a pulpit, as I do, but all
Christian people, in their measure and degree--will do nothing by
professing the best profession, unless that profession sounds like the
utterance of a man who speaks that he knows, and who can say, 'that
which our eyes have beheld, that which we have handled, of the Word of
life, we make known unto you.' And so, by the power of personal
experience speaking out in our lives, and by the power of it alone, as I
believe, will victories be won, and the witness of Jesus Christ be
repeated in the world. Christian men and women, the old saying which was
addressed by a prophet to Israel is more true, more solemnly true of us,
and presses on us with a heavier weight of obligation, as well as lifts
us up into a position of greater blessedness: 'Ye are my witnesses,
saith the Lord.' That is what you and I are here for--to bear witness,
different and yet like to, the witness borne by the Lord. We have all to
do that, by words, though not only by them. That is the obligation that
a great many Christian people take very lightly. That yoke of Jesus
Christ many of us slip our necks out of. If He has witnessed, you have
to confess. But some of you carry your Christianity in secret, and
button your coats over the cockade that should tell whose soldiers you
are, and are ashamed, or too shy, or too nervous, or too afraid of
ridicule, or not sufficiently sure of your own grip of the Master, to
confess Him before men. I beseech you remember that a Christian man is
no Christian unless 'with the mouth confession is made unto salvation,'
as well as 'with the heart' belief is exercised unto righteousness.

III. Lastly, we have here the practical issue of all this.

'I charge thee before God, who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus
Christ, that thou keep the commandment without spot.' The 'commandment,'
of course, may be used in a specific sense, referring to what has just
been enjoined, but more probably we are to regard the same thing which,
considered in its relation to Jesus Christ, is His testimony, as being,
in its relation to us, His commandment. For all Christ's gospel of
revelation that He has made of Himself to the world, is meant to
influence, not only belief and feeling, but conduct and character as
well. All the New Testament, in so far as it is a record of what Christ
is, and thereby a declaration of what God is, is also for us an
injunction as to what we ought to be. The whole Gospel is law, and the
testimony is commandment, and we have to keep it, as well as to confess
it. Let me put the few things that I have to say, under this last
division of my subject, the practical issue, into the shape of three
exhortations, not for the sake of seeming to arrogate any kind of
superiority, but for the sake of point and emphasis.

Let the life bear witness to the confession. What is the use of
Timothy's standing there, and professing himself a Christian before many
witnesses if, when he goes out into the world, his conduct gives the lie
to his creed, and he lives like the men that are not Christians? Back up
your confession by your conduct, and when you say 'I believe in Jesus
Christ,' let your life be as true an echo of His life as your confession
is of His testimony. Else we shall come under the condemnation, 'Nothing
but leaves,' and shall fall under the punishment of the continuance of
unfruitfulness, which is our crime as well as our punishment. There is a
great deal more done by consistent living for, and by inconsistent
living against, the truth of the Gospel, than by all the words of all
the preachers in the world. Your faults go further, and tell more, than
my sermons, and your Christian characters will go further than all the
eloquence of the most devoted preachers. 'There is no voice nor
language, where their sound is not heard. Their line is gone out into
all the earth, and their words to the end of the world.'

Again, let the thought of the Great Witness stimulate us. He, too, took
His place by our sides, though with the differences that I have pointed
out, yet with resemblances which bring Him very near us. He, too; knew
what it was to stand amongst those who shrugged their shoulders, and
knit their brows at His utterances, and turned away from Him, calling
Him sometimes 'dreamer,' sometimes 'revolutionary,' sometimes
'blasphemer,' and now and then a messenger of good tidings and a
preacher of the gospel of peace. He knows all our hesitations, all our
weaknesses, all our temptations. He was the first of the martyrs, in the
narrower sense of the word. He is the leader of the great band of
witnesses for God. Let us stand by His side, and be like Him in our
bearing witness in this world.

Again, let the thought of the great tribunal stimulate us. 'I give thee
charge before God, who quickeneth all things--and who therefore will
quicken you--and before Jesus Christ, that thou keep this commandment.'
Jesus, who witnessed to the truth, witnesses, in the sense of beholding
and watching, us, knowing our weakness and ready to help us. 'The
faithful witness, and the first begotten from the dead, and the Prince
of the kings of the earth,' is by us, as we witness for Him. And so,
though we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, the
saints in the past who have witnessed for God, and been witnessed to by
Him, we have to turn away from them, and 'look off' from all others,
'unto Jesus.' And we may, like the first of the noble army of martyrs,
see the heavens opened, and Jesus 'standing'--started to His feet, to
see and to help Stephen--'at the right hand of God.'

Brethren, let us listen to His witness, let us accept it, setting to our
seals that God is true. Then let us try to echo it back by word, and to
attest our confession by our conduct, and then we may comfort ourselves
with the great word, 'He that confesseth Me before men, Him will I also
confess before My Father which is in Heaven.'




THE CONDUCT THAT SECURES THE REAL LIFE

          'Laying up in store for themselves a good
          foundation against the time to come, that they may
          lay hold on eternal life.'--1 TIM. vi. 19.


In the first flush of the sense of brotherhood, the Church of Jerusalem
tried the experiment of having all things in common. It was not a
success, it was soon abandoned, it never spread. In the later history of
the Church, and especially in these last Pauline letters, we see clearly
that distinctions of pecuniary position were very definitely marked
amongst the believers. There were 'rich men' in the churches of which
Timothy had charge. No doubt they were rich after a very modest fashion,
for Paul's standard of opulence is not likely to have been a very high
one, seeing that he himself ministered with his own hands to his
necessities, and had only one cloak to keep him warm in winter time. But
great or small as were the resources of these men, they were rich in
comparison with some of their brethren. The words of my text are the
close of the very plain things which Paul commands Timothy to tell them.
He assures them that if they will be rich in good works, and ready to
distribute, they will lay up for themselves a good 'foundation against
the time to come.'

The teaching in the text is, of course, a great deal wider than any
specific application of it. It is very remarkable, especially as coming
from Paul. 'Lay up a good foundation'--has he not said, 'Other
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ'? 'That they may lay hold on eternal life'--has he not said, 'The
_gift_ of God is eternal life'? Is he not going dead in the teeth of his
own teaching, 'Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but by
His mercy He saved us'? I think not. Let us see what he does say.

I. First, then, he says that the real life is the future life.

Those of you who use the Revised Version will see that it makes an
alteration in the last clause of our text, and instead of 'eternal
life' it reads 'the life which is life indeed,' the true life; not
simply designating it as eternal, but designating it as being the only
thing that is worth calling by the august name of life.

Now it is quite clear that Paul here is approximating very closely to
the language of his brother John, and using this great word 'life' as
being, in substance, equivalent to his own favourite word of
'salvation,' as including in one magnificent generalisation all that is
necessary for the satisfaction of man's needs, the perfection of his
blessedness, and the glorifying of his nature. Paul's notion of life,
like John's, is that it is the one all-comprehensive good which men need
and seek.

And here he seems to relegate that 'life which is life indeed' to the
region of the future, because he contemplates it as being realised 'in
the time to come,' and as being the result of the conduct which is here
enjoined. But you will find that substantially the same exhortation is
given in the 12th verse of this chapter, 'Fight the good fight of faith;
lay hold on the life eternal'--where the process of grasping this
'life,' and therefore the possession of it, are evidently regarded as
possible here, and the duty of every Christian man in this present
world. That is to say, there is a double aspect of this august
conception of the 'life which is life indeed.' In one aspect it is
present, may be and ought to be ours, here and now; in another aspect it
lies beyond the flood, and is the inheritance reserved in the heavens.
That double aspect is parallel with the way in which the New Testament
deals with the other cognate conception of salvation, which it sometimes
regards as past, sometimes as present, sometimes as future. The complete
idea is that the life of the Christian soul here and yonder, away out
into the furthest extremities of eternity, and up to the loftiest climax
of perfectness, is in essence one, whilst yet the differences between
the degree in which its germinal possession here and its full-fruited
enjoyment hereafter differ is so great as that, in comparison with the
completion that is waiting the Christian soul beyond the grave, all of
the same life that is here enjoyed dwindles into nothingness. It appears
to me that these two sides of the truth, the essential identity of the
life of the Christian soul beyond and here, and the all but infinite
differences and progresses which separate the two, are both needful,
very needful, to be kept in view by us.

There is here on earth, amidst all our imperfections and weakness and
sin, a root in the heart that trusts in Christ, which only needs to be
transplanted into its congenial soil to blossom and burgeon into
undreamed of beauty, and to bear fruit the savour of which no mortal
lips can ever taste. The dwarfed rhododendrons in our shrubberies have
in them the same nature as the giants that adorn the slopes of the
Himalayas. Transplant these exotics to their native soil, and you would
see what it was in them to be. Think of the life that is now at its
best; its weakness, its blighted hopes, its thwarted aims, its foiled
endeavours; think of its partings, its losses, its conflicts. Think of
its disorders, its sins, and consequent sufferings; think of the shadow
at its close, which flings long trails of blackness over many preceding
years. Think of its swift disappearance, and then say if such a poor,
fragmentary thing is worthy of the name of life, if that were all that
the man was for.

But it is not all. There is a 'life which is life indeed,' over which
no shadow can pass, nor any sorrow darken the blessed faces or clog the
happy hearts of those who possess it. They 'have all and abound.' They
know all and are at rest. They dread nothing, and nothing do they
regret. They leave nothing behind as they advance, and of their serenity
and their growth there is no end. That is worth calling life. It lies
beyond this dim spot of earth. It is 'hid with Christ in God.'

II. Secondly, notice that conduct here determines the possession of the
true life.

Paul never cares whether he commits the rhetorical blunder of mixing up
metaphors or not. That matters very little, except to a pedant and a
rhetorician. In his impetuous way he blends three here, and has no time
to stop to disentangle them. They all mean substantially the same thing
which I have stated in the words that conduct here determines the
possession of life hereafter; but they put it in three different
figurative fashions which we may separate and look at one by one.

The first of them is this, that by our actions here we accumulate
treasure hereafter. 'Laying up in store for themselves' is one word in
the original, and it contains even more than is expressed in our
paraphrase, for it is really 'treasuring off.' And the idea is that the
rich man is bade to take a portion of his worldly goods, and, by using
these for beneficent purposes, out of them to store a treasure beyond
the grave. What is employed thus, and from the right motives and in the
right way, is not squandered, but laid up in store. You remember the old
epitaph,

          'What I spent I lost;
           What I gave I have.'

Now that is Christ's teaching, for did He not say: 'Sell all that thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven'? Did
He not say: 'Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, . . . but lay
up treasures in heaven'? And if anybody's theology finds it difficult to
incorporate these solemn teachings of our Lord with the rest of it, so
much the worse for the theology.

I have no doubt at all that Christianity has yet a great deal to teach
the Christian Church and the world about the acquisition of money and
the disposal of money; and, though I do not want to dwell now upon that
specific application of the general principle of my text, I cannot help
reminding you, dear friends, that for a very large number of us, almost
the most important influence shaping our characters is the attitude that
we take in regard to these things--the getting and the distribution of
worldly wealth. For the bulk of Christian people there are few things
more important as sharp tests of the reality of their religion, or more
effective in either ennobling or degrading their whole character, than
what they do about these two plain matters.

But then my text goes a great deal further than that; and whilst it
applies unflinchingly this principle to the one specific case, it
invites us to apply it all round the circumference of our earthly
conduct. What you are doing here is piling up for you, on the other side
of the wall, what you will have to live with, and either get good or
evil out of, through all eternity. A man who is going to Australia pays
some money into a bank here, and when he gets to Melbourne it is
punctually paid out to him across the counter. That is what we are doing
here, lodging money on this side that we are going to draw on that. And
it is this which gives to the present its mystical significance and
solemnity, that all our actions are piling up for us future possessions:
'treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath'; or, contrariwise,
'glory, immortality, honour, eternal life.' We are like men digging a
trench on one side of a hedge and flinging the spadefuls over to the
other. They are all being piled up behind the barrier, and when we go
round the end of it we shall find them all waiting for us.

Then the Apostle superimposes upon this another metaphor. He does not
care to unravel it. 'Laying up in store for themselves a store,' he
would have said if he had been a pedant, 'which is also a good
foundation.' Now I take it that that does not mean a basis for hope, or
anything of that sort, but that it conveys this thought, that our
actions here are putting in the foundations on which the eternal
building of our future life shall be reared. When a man excavates and
lays the first courses of the stones of his building, he thereby
determines every successive stage of it, until the headstone is brought
forth with rejoicing. We are laying foundations in that profound sense
in this world. Our nature takes a set here, and I fail to see any reason
cognisable by us why that ply of the nature should ever be taken out of
it in any future. I do not dogmatise; but it seems to me that all that
we do know of life and of God's dealings in regard to man leads us to
suppose that the next world is a world of continuations, not of
beginnings; that it is the second volume of the book, and hangs
logically and necessarily upon the first that was finished when a man
died. Our lives here and hereafter appear to me to be like some
geometrical figure that wants two sheets of paper for its completion:
on the first the lines run up to the margin, and on the second they are
carried on in the direction which was manifest in the section that was
visible here.

And so, dear friends, let us remember that this is the reason why our
smallest acts are so tremendous that by our actions we are making
character, and that character is destiny, here and hereafter. You are
putting in the foundations of the building that you have to live in; see
that they are of such a sort as will support a house eternal in the
heavens.

The last of the metaphors under which the Apostle suggests the one idea
is that our conduct here determines our capacity to lay hold of the
prize. It seems to me that the same allusion is lingering in his mind
which is definitely stated in the previous verse to which I have already
referred, where the eternal life which Timothy is exhorted to lay hold
of is regarded as being the prize of the good fight of faith, which he
is exhorted to fight. And so the third metaphor here is that which is
familiar in Paul's writings, where eternal life is regarded as a garland
or prize, given to the victor in race or arena. It is exactly the same
notion as he otherwise expresses when he says that he follows after if
that he may 'lay hold of that for which also he is laid hold of by Jesus
Christ.' This is the underlying thought, that according to a Christian
man's acts here is his capacity of receiving the real life yonder.

That is not given arbitrarily. Each man gets as much of it when he goes
home as he can hold. The tiniest vessel is filled, the largest vessel is
filled. But the little vessel may, and will, grow bigger if that which
is deposited in it be rightly employed. Let us lay this to heart, that
Christian men dare not treat it as a matter of indifference whether to
the full they live lives consistent with their profession, and do the
will of their Master or no. It is not all the same, and it will not be
all the same yonder, whether we have adorned the teaching, or whether
our lives have habitually and criminally fallen beneath the level of our
professions. Brethren, we are too apt to forget that there is such a
thing as being 'saved, yet so as by fire'; and that there is such a
thing as 'having an entrance ministered abundantly into the Kingdom.' Be
you sure of this, that if the hands of your spirits are ever to be
capable of grasping the prize, it must be as the result of conduct here
on earth, which has been treasuring up treasures yonder, and laying a
foundation on which the incorruptible house may solidly rest.

III. And now the last word that I have to say is that these principles
are perfectly compatible with the great truth of salvation by faith.

For observe to whom the text is spoken. It is to men who have professed
to be believers, and it is on the ground of their faith that these rich
men in Timothy's churches are exhorted to this conduct. There is no
incompatibility between the doctrine that eternal life is the gift of
God, and the placing of those who have received that gift under a strict
law of recompense.

That is the teaching of the whole New Testament. It was to _Christian_
men that it was said: 'Be not deceived; God is not mocked, whatsoever a
man soweth that shall he also reap.' It is the teaching of Jesus Christ
Himself.

But there is a dreadful danger that we, with our partial vision, shall
see one side of the truth so clearly that we do not see the other; and
so you get two antagonistic schools of Christian teaching who have torn
the one word into halves. One of them says, 'Man is saved by faith
only,' and forgets 'faith without works is dead'; and the other says,
'Do your duty, and never mind about your belief,' and forgets that the
belief--the trust--is the only sure foundation on which conduct can be
based, and the only source from which it is certain to flow.

Now, if I should not be misunderstood by that same narrow and contracted
vision of which I have been speaking, I would venture to say that
salvation by faith alone may be so held as to be a very dangerous
doctrine, and that there is a very real sense in which a man is saved by
works. And if you do not like that, go home and read the Epistle of
James, and see what you make of his teaching: 'Ye see, brethren, how
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.' 'Faith wrought
with his works, and by his works was his faith made perfect.'

Only let us understand where the exhortation of the text comes in. We
have to begin with absolute departure from all merit in work, and the
absolute casting of ourselves on Jesus Christ. If you have not done
that, my brother, the teaching 'Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation' has no application to you, but this teaching has, 'Other
foundation can no man lay. Behold, I lay in Zion a tried corner-stone.
Whosoever believeth in Him shall not make haste.' If you have not
committed your souls and selves and lives and hopes to Jesus Christ, the
teaching 'Lay hold on eternal life' has only a very modified application
to you, because the only hand that can grasp that life is the hand of
faith that is content to receive it from His hands with the prints of
the nails in them. But if you have given yourselves to that Saviour, and
received the germinal gift of eternal life from Him, then, take my text
as absolutely imperative for you. Remember that it is for you, resting
on Christ, to treasure up eternal life; for you to build on that sure
foundation gold and silver and precious stones which may stand the fire;
for you, by faithful continuance in well-doing, to lay hold of that for
which you have been laid hold of by Jesus Christ. May it be true of all
of us that 'our works do follow us'!

          'Thy works, thine alms, and all thy good endeavour
             Stayed not behind, nor in the grave were trod,
             But, as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
           Followed thee up to joy and bliss for ever.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Part I,

Page 44, "transcendant" changed to "transcendent" (this one
transcendent)

Page 59, "entrace" changed to "entrance" (a private entrance)

Page 72, "for for" changed to "for" (day, for one)

Page 150, "roalties" changed to "royalties" (symbols for royalties)

Page 269, "immoveable" changed to "immovable" (firm and immovable)

Part II,

Page 52, "whatsover" changed to "whatsoever" (whatsoever things are
lovely)

Page 63, "centifugal" changed to "centrifugal" (centrifugal and
centripetal)

Page 118, a bit of text was not inked in the original, the following
words have been presumed:

          clea        clear
          an          and
          kno         know
          me          men

  For:                                      "clear
  before you, or you will go yawing about, and washing
  here and there, in the trough of the wave, and
  the tempest will be your master. If you do not know
  where you are going you will have to say, like the men"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by
Alexander Maclaren

