conspicuous place, that to look on it might stay the effect of the
poison, is remarkable, not only as sanctioning the forming of an image,
but as associating healing power with a material object. Two questions
must be considered separately,--What did the method of cure say to the
men who turned their bloodshot, languid eyes to it? and What does it
mean for us, who see it by the light of our Lord's great words about
it? As to the former question, we have not to take into account the Old
Testament symbolism which makes the serpent the emblem of Satan or of
sin. Serpents had bitten the wounded. Here was one like them, but
without poison, hanging harmless on the pole. Surely that would declare
that God had rendered innocuous the else fatal creatures. The elevation
of the serpent was simply intended to make it visible from afar; but it
could not have been set so high as to be seen from all parts of the
camp, and we must suppose that the wounded were in many cases carried
from the distant parts of the wide-spreading encampment to places
whence they could catch a glimpse of it glittering in the sunshine. We
are not told that trust in God was an essential part of the look, but
that is taken for granted. Why else should a half-dead man lift his
heavy eyelids to look? Such a one knew that God had commanded the image
to be made, and had promised healing for a look. His gaze was fixed on
it, in obedience to the command involved in the promise, and was, in
some measure, a manifestation of faith. No doubt the faith was very
imperfect, and the desire was only for physical healing; but none the
less it had in it the essence of faith. It would have been too hard a
requirement for men through whose veins the swift poison was burning
its way, and who, at the best, were so little capable of rising above
sense, to have asked from them, as the condition of their cure, a trust
which had no external symbol to help it. The singularity of the method
adopted witnesses to the graciousness of God, who gave their feebleness
a thing that they could look at, to aid them in grasping the unseen
power which really effected the cure. 'He that turned himself to it,'
says the Book of Wisdom, 'was not saved by the thing which he saw, but
by Thee, that art the Saviour of all.'

Our Lord has given us the deepest meaning of the brazen serpent. Taught
by Him, we are to see in it a type of Himself, the significance of
which could not be apprehended till Calvary had given the key. Three
distinct points of parallel are suggested by His use of the incident in
His conversation with Nicodemus. First, He takes the serpent as an
emblem of Himself. Now it is clear that it is so, not in regard to the
saving power that dwells in Him, but in regard to His sinless manhood,
which was made 'in the likeness of sinful flesh,' yet 'without sin.'
The symbolism which takes the serpent as the material type of sin comes
into view now, and is essential to the full comprehension of the
typical significance of the incident.

Secondly, Jesus laid stress on the 'lifting up' of the serpent. That
'lifting up' has two meanings. It primarily refers to the Crucifixion,
wherein, just as the death-dealing power was manifestly triumphed over
in the elevation of the brazen serpent, the power of sin is exhibited
as defeated, as Paul says, 'triumphing over them in it' (Col. ii.
14,15). But that lifting up on the Cross draws after it the elevation
to the throne, and to that, or, rather, to both considered as
inseparably united, our Lord refers when He says,' I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto Me.'

Thirdly, the condition of healing is paralleled. 'When he looked unto
the serpent of brass, he lived.' 'That whosoever believeth may in Him
have eternal life.' From the serpent no healing power flowed; but our
eternal life is '_in_ Him,' and _from_ Him it flows into our poisoned,
dying nature. The sole condition of receiving into ourselves that new
life which is free from all taint of sin, and is mighty enough to
arrest the venom that is diffused through every drop of blood, is faith
in Jesus lifted on the Cross to slay the sin that is slaying mankind,
and raised to the throne to bestow His own immortal and perfect life on
all who look to Him. The bitten Israelite might be all but dead. The
poison wrought swiftly; but if he from afar lifted his glazing eyeballs
to the serpent on the pole, a swifter healing overtook the death that
was all but conqueror, and cast it out, and he who was borne half
unconscious to the foot of the standard went away a sound man,
'walking, and leaping, and praising God.' So it may be with any man,
however deeply tainted with sin, if he will trust himself to Jesus, and
from  'the ends of the earth' 'look unto' Him 'and be saved,' His power
knows no hopeless cases. He _can_ cure all. He _will_ cure our most
ingrained sin, and calm the hottest fever of our poisoned blood, if we
will let Him. The only thing that we have to do is to gaze, with our
hearts in our eyes and faith in our hearts, on Him, as He is lifted on
the Cross and the throne. But we must so gaze, or we die, for none but
He can cast out the coursing venom. None but He can arrest the
swift-footed death that is intertwined with our very natures.




BALAAM

    'He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of
    Beor to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of
    the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold
    there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they
    cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against
    me.'--NUM. xxii. 6.

Give a general outline of the history. See Bishop Butler's great sermon.

I. How much knowledge and love of good there may be in a bad man.

Balaam was a prophet:

_(a)_ He knew something of the divine character,

_(b)_ He knew what righteousness was (Micah v. 8).

_(c)_ He knew of a future state, and longed for 'the last end of the
righteous.'

He would not break the law of God, and curse by word of mouth:

But yet for all that he wanted to curse. He wanted to do the wrong
thing, and that made him bad. And when he durst not do it in one way,
he did it in another.

So he is a picture of the universal blending and mixture that there is
even in bad men.

It is not knowledge that makes a man good.

It is not aspirations after righteousness. These dwell more or less in
all souls.

It is not desire 'to go to heaven'--everybody has that desire.

Perfectly vicious men are devils. There is always the blending.

Many of us are trusting to these vagrant wishes, but my friends, it is
not what a man would sometimes like, but what the whole set and tenor
of his life tends towards, that makes him. There may be plenty of
backwater eddies and cross-currents in the sea, but the tide goes on
all the same.

  'All these fancies and their whole array
   One cunning bosom sin blows quite away,'

'Let no man deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous.'

Do not trust your convictions; they are powerless in the fight.

II. How men may deceive themselves about their condition, or the
self-illusions and compromises of sin.

These convictions will never, by themselves, keep a man from evil, but
they may lead men to try to compromise, just as Balaam did. He would
go, but he would not, for the life of him, curse; and he evidently
thought that he was a hero in firmness and a martyr to duty.

He would not curse in words, but he did it in another way--by means of
Baal-peor.

So we find men making compromises between duty and inclination; keeping
the letter and breaking the spirit; obeying in some respects and
indemnifying themselves for their obedience by their disobedience in
others; very devout, attentive to all religious observances, and yet
sinning on. And we find such men playing tricks upon themselves, and
really deluding themselves into the idea that they are very good men!

This is the great characteristic of sin, its deceitfulness. It always
comes as an 'angel of light,' like some of those weird stories in which
we read about a strange guest at a banquet who discloses a skeleton
below the wedding garment!

'Father of lies.' '_Nihil imbecillius denudato diabolo._' The more one
sins, the less capable he becomes of discerning evil. Conscience
becomes sophisticated, and it is always possible to refine away its
judgments.

'By reason of use have their senses exercised to discern.' 'Take heed
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.'

III. The absurdity and unreasonableness of unrighteousness.

We look at Balaam, and think, how could a man purpose anything so
foolish as to go on seeking for an opportunity to break a law which he
knew to be irrevocable!

Yet what did he do but what every sinner does?

All sin is the breach of law which at the very moment of breaking is
known to be imperative.

All sin is thus the overbearing of conscience, or the sophistication of
conscience, and all sin is the incurring voluntarily of consequences
which at the moment are or might be known to be certain, and far
overbalancing any fancied 'wages of unrighteousness.'

Thus all sin is the overbearing of reason or the sophisticating of
reason by passion. Men know the absurdity of sin, and yet men will go
on sinning. 'A rogue is a roundabout fool.' All wrongdoing is a mighty
blunder. It is only righteousness which is congruous with a man's
reason, with a man's conscience, with a man's highest happiness. 'The
fear of the Lord,' that is wisdom.

IV. The wages of unrighteousness.

How Balaam's experiment ended--his death. He tried to make the 'best of
both worlds,' so he ran with the hare and hunted with the hounds, and
this was how it ended, as it always does, as it always will. How death
ends all the illusions, sternly breaks down all the compromises,
reveals all the absurdities!

Men are one thing or the other. Learn, then, the lesson that no gifts,
no talents, no convictions, no aspirations will avail.

Let this sad figure which looks out upon us with grey streaming hair
and uplifted hands from beside the altar on Pisgah speak to us.

How near the haven it is possible to be cast away! Like Bunyan's way to
hell from near the gate of the celestial city.

Balaam said, 'Let me die the death of the righteous!' and his death was
thus:--'Balaam they slew with the sword,' and his epitaph is 'Balaam
the son of Beor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,' got them, and
perished!




AN UNFULFILLED DESIRE


    '... Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my
    last end be like his!'--NUM. xxiii. 10.

    '... Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the
    sword.'--NUM. xiii. 8.

Ponder these two pictures. Take the first scene. A prophet, who knows
God and His will, is standing on the mountain top, and as he looks down
over the valley beneath him, with its acacia-trees and swift river,
there spread the tents of Israel. He sees them, and knows that they are
'a people whom the Lord hath blessed.' Brought there to curse, 'he
blesses them altogether'; and as he gazes upon their ordered ranks and
sees somewhat of the wondrous future that lay before them, his mind is
filled with the thought of all the blessedness of that righteous
nation, and the sigh of longing comes to his lips, 'May I be with them
in life and death; may I have no higher honour, no calmer end, than to
lie down and die as one of the chosen people, with memories of a divine
hand that has protected me all through the past, and quiet hopes of the
same hand holding me up in the great darkness!' A devout aspiration, a
worthy desire!

Look at the other picture. Midian has seduced Israel to idolatry and
its constant companion, sensual sin. The old lawgiver has for his last
achievement to punish the idolater. 'Avenge the children of Israel of
the Midianites, afterwards thou shalt be gathered to thy people.' So
each tribe gives its contingent to the fight, and under the fierce and
prompt Phinehas, whose javelin had already smitten one of the chief
offenders, they go forth. Fire and sword, devastation and victory, mark
their track. The princes of Midian fall before the swift rush of the
desert-born invaders. And--sad, strange company!--among them is the
'man who saw the vision of the Almighty, and knew the knowledge of the
Most High'! he who had taught Moab the purest lessons of morality, and
Midian, alas! the practice of the vilest profligacy; he who saw from
afar 'the sceptre arise out of Israel and the Star from Jacob'; he who
longed to 'die the death of the righteous'! The onset of the avenging
host, with the 'shout of a king' in their midst; the terror of the
flight, the riot of havoc and bloodshed, and, finally, the quick thrust
of the sharp Israelite sword in some strong hand, and the grey hairs
all dabbled with his blood--these were what the man came to who had
once breathed the honest desire, 'Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his'!

I. There is surely a solemn lesson for us all here--as touching the
danger of mere vague religious desires and convictions which we do not
allow to determine our conduct.

Balaam had evidently much knowledge. Look at these points--

_(a)_ His knowledge of the covenant-name of God.

_(b)_ His knowledge of a pure morality and a spiritual worship far
beyond sacrificial notions, and in some respects higher than the then
Old Testament standpoint.

_(c)_ The knowledge (which is implied in the text) of a future state,
which had gone far into the background, even if it had not been
altogether lost, among the Israelites. Is it not remarkable that the
religious ideas of this man were in advance of Israel's at this time;
that there seems to have lingered among these 'outsiders' more of a
pure faith than in Israel itself?

What a lesson here as to the souls led by God and enlightened by Him
beyond the pale of Judaism!

But all this knowledge, of what use was it to Balaam? He knows about
God: does he seek to serve Him? He preaches morality to Moab, and he
teaches Midian to 'teach the children of Israel to commit fornication.'
He knows something of the blessedness of a 'righteous man's' death, and
perhaps sees faintly the shining gates beyond--but how does it all end?
What a gulf between _knowledge_ and _life_!

What is the use of correct ideas about God? They may be the foundations
of holy thoughts, and they are meant to be so. I am not setting up
emotion above principle, or fancying that there can be religion without
theology; but for what are all our thoughts about God given us?

_(a)_ That they may influence our hearts.

_(b)_ That they may subdue our wills.

_(c)_ That they may mould our practical life.

If they do not do that--then _what_ do they do?

They constitute a positive hindrance--like the dead lava-blocks that
choke the mouth of a crater, or the two deposits on the bottom of a
boiler, soot outside and crust inside, which keep the fire from getting
at the water. They have lost their power because they are so familiar.
They are weakened by not being practised. The very organs of
intelligence are, as it were, ossified. Self-complacency lays hold on
the possession of these ideas and shields itself against all appeals
with the fact of possessing them. Many a man mistakes, in his own case,
the knowledge of the truth for obedience to the truth. All this is seen
in everyday life, and with reference to all manner of convictions, but
it is most apparent and most fatal about Christian truth. I appeal to
the many who hear and know all about 'the word,' What more is needed?
That you should do what you know ('Be not hearers only'); that you
should yield your whole being to Christ, the living Word.

II. Balaam is an example of convictions which remain inefficacious.

It was not without some sense of his own character, and some
forebodings of what was possibly brooding over him, that he uttered
these words of the text. But they were transitory emotions, and they
passed away.

I suppose that every man who hears the gospel proclaimed is, at some
time or other, conscious of dawning thoughts which, if followed, would
lead him to decision for Christ. I suppose that every man among us is
conscious of thoughts visiting him many a time when he least expects
them, which, if honestly obeyed, would work an entire revolution in his
life.

I do not wish to speak as if unbelieving men were the only people who
were unfaithful to their consciences, but rather to deal with what is a
besetting sin of us all, though it reaches its highest aggravation in
reference to the gospel.

Such stings of conviction come to us all, but how are they deadened?

_(a)_ By simple neglect. Pay no attention to them; do not do anything
in consequence, and they will gradually disappear. The voice unheard
will cease to speak. Non-obedience to conscience will in the end almost
throttle conscience.

_(b)_ By angry rejection.

_(c)_ By busy occupation with the outer world.

_(d)_ By sinful occupation with it.

Then consider that such dealing with our convictions leaves us far
worse men than before, and if continued will end in utter insensibility.

What should we do with such convictions? Reverently follow them. And in
so doing they will grow and increase, and lead us at last to God and
peace.

Special application of all this to our attitude towards Christian truth.

III. Balaam is an instance of wishes that are never fulfilled.

He wished to die 'as the righteous.' How did he die? miserably; and why?

(1) Because his wish was deficient in character.

It was _one_ among a great many, feeble and not predominant, occasioned
by circumstances, and so fading when these disappeared. Like many men's
relation to the gospel who would _like_ to be Christians, and are not.
These vagrant wishes are nothing; mere 'catspaws' of wind, not a
breeze. They are not real, even while they last, and so they come to
nothing.

(2) Because it was partially wrong in its object.

He was willing to die the death, but not to live the life, of the
righteous; like many men who would be very glad to 'go to heaven when
they die,' but who will not be Christians while they live.

Now, God forbid that I should say that his wish was wrong! But only it
was not enough. Such a wish led to no action.

Now, God hears the faintest wish; He does not require that we should
will strongly, but He does require that we should desire, and that we
should act according to our desires.

Let the close be a brief picture of a righteous death. And oh! if you
feel that it is blessed, then let that desire lead you to Christ, and
all will be well. Remember that Bunyan saw a byway to hell at the door
of the celestial city. Remember how Balaam ended, and stands gibbeted
in the New Testament as an evil man, and the type of false teachers.
Finally, beware of knowledge which is not operative in conduct, of
convictions which are neglected and pass away, of vague desires which
come to nought.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by
Alexander Maclaren

