in her affection for them, could not forsake her offspring, those infant
Rishis encased in eggs. Moved by parental affection, she brought up these
children born of her, herself following the pursuits proper to her own
species. Some time after, the Rishi, in wandering over that forest in the
company of Lapita, saw Agni coming towards Khandava to burn it down. Then
the Brahmana Mandapala, knowing the intention of Agni and remembering also
that his children were all young moved by fear, gratified the god, of the
burning element, that regent of the universe, endued with great energy.
And he did this, desiring to put in a word for his unfledged offspring.
Addressing Agni, the Rishi said, "Thou art, O Agni, the mouth of all the
worlds! Thou art the carrier of the sacrificial butter! O purifier (of all
sins), thou movest invisible with the frame of every creature! The learned
have spoken of thee as an One, and again as possessed of triple nature.
The wise perform their sacrifices before thee, taking thee as consisting
of eight (mouths). The great Rishis declare that this universe hath been
created by thee. O thou that feedest on sacrificial butter, without thee
this whole universe would be destroyed in a single day. Bowing to thee,
the Brahmanas, accompanied by their wives and children, go to eternal
regions won by them by help of their own deeds. O Agni, the learned
represent thee as the clouds in the heavens charged with lightning. O Agni,
the flames put forth by thee consume every creature. O thou of great
splendour, this universe hath been created by thee. The Vedas are thy word.
All creatures, mobile and immobile, depend upon thee. Water primarily
dependeth on thee, so also the whole of this universe. All offerings of
clarified butter and oblations of food to the pitris have been established
in thee. O god, thou art the consumer, and thou art the creator and thou
art Vrihaspati himself (in intelligence). Thou art the twin Aswins; thou
art Surya; thou art Soma; thou art Vayu."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'O monarch, thus praised by Mandapala, Agni was
gratified with that Rishi of immeasurable energy; and the god, well-
pleased, replied, "What good can I do to thee?" Then Mandapala with joined
palms said unto the carrier of clarified butter, "While thou burnest the
forest of Khandava, spare my children." The illustrious bearer of
clarified butter replied, "So be it." It was, therefore, O monarch, that
he blazed not forth, while consuming the forest of Khandava, for the
destruction of Mandapala's children.'"


SECTION CCXXXII

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'When the fire blazed forth in the forest of Khandava,
the infant birds became very much distressed and afflicted. Filled with
anxiety, they saw not any means of escape. Their mother, the helpless
Jarita, knowing that they were too young to escape, was filled with sorrow
and wept aloud. And she said, "Oh, the terrible, illuminating the whole
universe and burning the forest down, approacheth towards us, increasing
my woe. These infants with immature understanding, without feathers and
feet, and the sole refuge of our deceased ancestors, afflict me. Oh, this
fire approacheth, spreading fear all around, and licking with its tongue
the tallest trees. But my unfledged children are incapable of effecting
their escape. I myself am not capable of escaping, taking all these with
me. Nor am I capable of abandoning them, for my heart is distressed on
their account. Whom amongst my sons, shall I leave behind, and whom shall
I carry with me? What (act) should I do now that is consistent with duty?
What also do you, my infant sons, think? I do not, even by reflection, see
any way of escape for you. I shall even cover you with my wings and die
with you. Your cruel father left me some time before, saying, 'Upon this
Jaritari, because he is the eldest of my sons, will my race depend. My
second Sarisrikka will beget progeny for the expansion of my ancestors'
race. My third, Stamvamitra, will be devoted to asceticism, and my
youngest, Drona, will become the foremost of those acquainted with the
Vedas.' But how hath this terrible calamity overtaken us! Whom shall I
take with me? As I am deprived of judgment what should I do that is
consistent with duty? I do not see, by the exercise of my own judgment,
the escape of my children from the fire!"'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Unto their mother indulging in these lamentations,
the infant ones said, "O mother, relinquishing thy affection for us, go
thou to a place where there is no fire. If we are killed here, thou mayest
have other children born to thee. If thou, O mother be killed, we can have
no more children in our race. Reflecting upon both these calamities, the
time hath come for thee, O mother, to do that which is beneficial to our
race. Do not be influenced by affection for thy offspring, which promises
to destroy both us and thee. If thou savest thyself, our father, who is
even desirous of winning regions of felicity, may have his wishes
gratified."

"'Hearing what the infants said, Jarita replied, "There is a hole here in
the ground near to this tree, belonging to a mouse. Enter this hole
without loss of time. You shall have then no fear of fire. After ye have
entered it, I shall, ye children, cover its mouth with dust. This is the
only means of escape that I see from the blazing fire. Then when the fire
will be put out, I shall return hither to remove the dust. Follow my
advice if you are to escape from the conflagration."

"'The infant birds replied, "Without feathers we are but so many balls of
flesh. If we enter the hole, certain it is that the carnivorous mouse will
destroy us all. Beholding this danger before us, we cannot enter this hole.
Alas, we do not see any means by which we may escape from the fire or from
the mouse. We do not see how our father's act of procreation may be
prevented from becoming futile, and how also our mother may be saved. If
we enter the hole, the mouse will destroy us; we remain where we are and
the sky-ranging fire will destroy us. Reflecting upon both the calamities,
a death by fire is preferable to a death by being eaten up. If we are
devoured by the mouse within the hole, that death is certainly ignoble,
whereas the destruction of the body in fire is approved by the wise."'"


SECTION CCXXXIII

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing those words of her sons Jarita continued,
"The little mouse that had come out of this hole was seized by a hawk with
his claws and carried away hence. Therefore, ye may fearlessly enter this
hole now." The young ones replied, "We are not by any means certain of
that mouse having been taken away by the hawk. There may be other mice
living here. From them we have every fear. Whereas it is doubtful whether
fire will at all approach us here. Already we see an adverse wind blowing
the flames away. If we enter the hole, death is certain at the hands of
the dwellers in the hole. But if we remain where we are, death is
uncertain. O mother, a position in which death is uncertain is better than
that in which it is certain. It is thy duty, therefore, to escape thyself,
for, if thou livest thou mayest obtain other children as good."

"'Their mother then said, "Ye children, I myself saw the mighty hawk, that
best of birds, swoop down and fly away with the mouse from the hole. And
while he was flying away swiftly, I followed him behind and pronounced
blessing on him for his having taken away the mouse from the hole. I said
unto him, 'O king of hawks, because thou art flying away with our enemy,
the mouse, in thy claws, mayest thou, without a foe, live in heaven with a
golden body.' Afterwards when that hawk devoured the mouse, I came away,
obtaining his leave. Therefore, ye children, enter this hole trustfully.
Ye have nothing to fear. The mouse that was its inmate was seized and
taken away by the hawk in my sight." The young ones again said, "O mother,
we do not by any means know that the mouse hath been carried away by the
hawk. We cannot enter this hole in the ground without being certain of the
fact." Their mother said, "I know to a certainty that the mouse hath been
carried away by the hawk. Therefore, ye children, ye have nothing to fear;
do what I say." The young ones again said, "We do not, O mother, say that
thou art dispelling our fears with a false story. For whatever is done by
a person when his reason hath been disturbed can scarcely be said to be
that person's deliberate act. Thou hast not been benefited by us, nor dost
thou know who we are. Why dost thou, therefore, strive to protect us at so
much cost to thyself? Who are we to thee? Thou art young and handsome, and
capable of seeking out thy husband. Go unto thy husband. Thou shalt obtain
good children again. Let us by entering the fire attain to regions of
felicity. If, however, the fire consume us not, thou mayest come back and
obtain us again."'

"Vaisampayana said, 'The parent bird then, thus addressed by her sons,
left them in Khandava and hastily went to the spot where there was no fire
and there was safety. Then Agni in haste and with fierce flames approached
the spot where the sons of Mandapala were. The young birds saw the blazing
fire come towards them. Then Jaritari, the eldest of the four, in the
hearing of Agni, began to speak.'"


SECTION CCXXXIV

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"'Jaritari said, "The person that is wise remaineth wakeful in view of
death. Accordingly, when the hour of death approacheth, he feeleth no
pangs. But the person of perplexed soul, who remaineth not awake, when the
hour of death comes, feeleth the pangs of death and never attaineth
salvation."

"'The second brother, Sarisrikka, said, "Thou art patient and intelligent.
The time is come when our lives are threatened. Without doubt, one only
amongst many becometh wise and brave."

"'The third brother, Stamvamitra, said, "The eldest brother is called the
protector. It is the eldest brother that rescueth (the younger ones) from
danger. If the eldest himself faileth to rescue them, what can the younger
ones do?"

"'The fourth and the youngest brother, Drona, said, "The cruel god of fire,
with seven tongues and seven mouths quickly cometh towards our habitation,
blazing forth in splendour and licking up everything in his path."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having addressed one another thus, the sons of
Mandapala then each devotedly addressed an eulogistic hymn to Agni. Listen
now, O monarch, to those hymns as I recite them.

"'Jaritari said, "Thou art, O fire, the soul of air! Thou art the body of
the Earth's vegetation! O Sukra, water is thy parent as thou art the
parent of water! O thou of great energy, thy flames, like the rays of the
sun, extend themselves above, below, behind, and on each side."

"'Sarisrikka said, "O smoke-bannered god, our mother is not to be seen, and
we know not our father! Our feathers have not grown as yet. We have none
to protect us save thee. Therefore, O Agni, infants that we are protect
us! O Agni, as we are distressed, protect us with that auspicious form
thou hast and with those seven flames of thine! We seek protection at thy
hands. Thou alone, O Agni, art the giver of heat (in the universe). O lord,
there is none else (save thee) that giveth heat to the rays of the sun. O,
protect us who are young and who are Rishis. O Havyavaha (carrier of
sacrificial butter), be pleased to go hence by some other route."

"'Stamvamitra said, "Thou alone, O Agni, art everything! This whole
universe is established in thee! Thou sustainest every creature, and thou
supportest the universe! Thou art the carrier of the sacrificial butter,
and thou art the excellent sacrificial butter itself! The wise know thee
to be one (as cause) and many (as effects)! Having created the three
worlds, thou, O Havyavaha, again destroyest them when the time cometh,
swelling thyself forth! Thou art the productive cause of the whole
universe, and thou also art the essence in which the universe dissolveth
itself!"

"'Drona said, "O lord of the universe, growing in strength and remaining
within their bodies, thou causest the food that living creatures eat to be
digested. Everything therefore, is established in thee. O Sukra, O thou
from whose mouth the Vedas have sprung, it is thou who assumests the form
of the sun, and sucking up the waters of the earth and every liquid juice
that the earth yields, givest them back in time in the form of rain and
causest everything to grow! From thee, O Sukra, are these plants and
creepers with green foliage! From thee have sprung these tanks and pools,
and the great ocean also that is ever blessed! O thou of fierce rays, this
our (human) body dependeth on Varuna (the water-god)! We are unable to
bear thy heat. Be thou, therefore, our auspicious protector! O, destroy us
not! O thou of copper-hued eyes, O thou of red neck, O thou whose path is
marked by a black colour, save us by going along any remote route, as
indeed, the ocean saveth the house on its banks!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Drona--that utterer of Brahma--
Agni, well-pleased at what he heard, and remembering also the promise he
had made to Mandapala, replied unto him, saying, "Thou art a Rishi, O
Drona! For what thou hast said is Brahma (Vedic truth). I shall do your
pleasure. Fear not! Indeed, Mandapala had spoken to me of you to the
effect that I should spare his sons, while consuming the forest. The words
he spoke and thy speech also are entitled to great weight to me. Say what
I am to do. O best of Brahmanas, I have been greatly pleased with thy hymn.
Blest be thou, O Brahmana!"

"'Drona said, "O Sukra, these cats trouble us every day. O Hutasana;
consume them with their friends and relatives."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Agni did what the Sarngakas asked him to
do, telling them of his intentions. And, O Janamejaya, growing in strength,
he began then to consume the forest of Khandava.'"


SECTION CCXXXV

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'O thou of Kuru's race, the Rishi Mandapala became
very anxious about his children, although he had spoken of them to the god
of fierce rays. Indeed, his mind was not in peace. Distressed on account
of his sons, he addressed Lapita (his second wife with whom he then was),
saying, "O Lapita, as my children are incapable of the power of moving,
how are they? When the fire will grow in strength and the wind begin to
blow violently, my children will scarcely be able to save themselves. How
will their mother be able to rescue them? That innocent woman will be
afflicted with great sorrow when she will find herself unable to save her
offspring. Oh, how will she compose herself, uttering various lamentations
on account of my children who are all incapable of taking wing or rising
up into the air. Oh, how is Jaritari, my son, and how is Sarisrikka, and
how is Stamvamitra, and how is Drona, and how also is their helpless
mother?"

"'Unto the Rishi Mandapala thus weeping in the forest, Lapita, O Bharata,
thus replied, under the influence of jealousy, "Thou need not worry for
thy children who, as thou hast assured me, are all Rishis endued with
energy and prowess! They can have no fear from fire. Didst thou not speak
to Agni in my presence, in their behalf? Has not the illustrious deity
promised to save them? One of the regents of the universe as Agni is, he
will never falsify his speech. Thou hast no anxiety, nor is thy heart
inclined towards benefiting friends. It is only by thinking of her--my
rival (Jarita) that thou art so distracted! Certain it is that the love
thou bearest to me is not equal to what thou hadst for her at first. He
that hath two parties dividing his attention, can easily behold one of
those suffer all sorts of pangs; but he should not disregard the party
that is next to his heart. Then go thou to Jarita, for whom thy heart is
sorrowing! As for myself, I shall henceforth wander alone, as a fit reward
for my having attached myself to a wicked person."

"'Hearing these words, Mandapala replied, "I do not wander over the earth
with such intentions as thou conceivest. It is only for the sake of
progeny that I am here. And even those that I have are in danger. He who
casteth off what he hath for the sake of what he may acquire, is a wicked
person. The world disregardeth and insulteth him. (Therefore, go I must).
As for thyself thou art free to do what thou choosest. This blazing fire
that licketh up the trees causeth sorrow in my anxious heart and raiseth
therein evil presentiments."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Meanwhile, after the fire had left the spot
where the Sarngakas dwelt, Jarita, much attached to her children, hastily
came thither to see how they were. She found that all of them had escaped
from the fire and were perfectly well. Beholding their mother, they began
to weep, though safe and sound. She too shed tears upon beholding them
alive. And she embraced, one by one, all her weeping children. Just at
that time, O Bharata, the Rishi Mandapala arrived there. But none of his
sons expressed joy, upon beholding him. The Rishi, however, began to speak
to them one after another and unto Jarita also, repeatedly. But neither
his sons nor Jarita spoke anything well or ill unto him in return.

"'Mandapala then said, "Who amongst these is thy first born, and who the
next after him? And who is the third, and who the youngest? I am speaking
unto thee woefully; why dost thou not reply to me? I left thee, it is true,
but I was not happy where I was."

"'Jarita then said, "What hast thou to do with the eldest of these, and
what with him that is next? And what with the third and what with the
youngest? Go now unto that Lapita of sweet smiles and endued with youth,
unto whom thou didst go of old, beholding me deficient in everything!"
Mandapala replied, "As regards females, there is nothing so destructive of
their happiness whether in this or the other world as a co-wife and a
clandestine lover. There is nothing like these two that inflames the fire
of hostility and causes such anxiety. Even the auspicious and well-behaved
Arundhati, celebrated amongst all creatures, had been jealous of the
illustrious Vasishtha of great purity of mind and always devoted to the
good of his wife. Arundhati insulted even the wise Muni amongst the
(celestial) seven. In consequence of such insulting thoughts of hers, she
has become a little star, like fire mixed with smoke, sometimes visible
and sometimes invisible, like an omen portending no good (amongst a
constellation of seven bright stars representing the seven Rishis). I look
to thee for the sake of children. I never wronged thee, like Vasishtha who
never wronged his wife. Thou hast, therefore, by thy jealousy behaved
towards me like Arundhati of old towards Vasishtha. Men should never trust
women even if they be wives. Women, when they have become mothers, do not
much mind serving their husbands."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, all his children came forward to
worship him. And he also began to speak kindly towards them all, giving
them every assurance.'"


SECTION CCXXXVI

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Mandapala then addressed his children, saying, "I had
spoken unto Agni for the safety of you all. The illustrious deity had
assured me that he would grant my wish. At those words of Agni, and
knowing the virtuous disposition of your mother, as also the great energy
that is in yourselves, I came not here earlier. Therefore, ye sons, do not
harbour in your hearts any resentment towards me. Ye are all Rishis
acquainted with the Vedas. Even Agni knoweth you well."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having given such assurances unto his sons, the
Brahmana Mandapala took with him his wife and sons, and leaving that
region, went away to some other country.

"'It thus that the illustrious god of fierce rays, having grown in
strength consumed the forest of Khandava with the help of Krishna and
Arjuna, for the good of the world. And Agni having drunk several rivers of
fat and marrow, became highly gratified, and showed himself to Arjuna.
Then Purandara, surrounded by the Maruts, descended from the firmament and
addressing Partha and Kesava said, "Ye have achieved a feat that a
celestial even could not. Ask ye each a boon that is not obtainable by any
man. I have been gratified with you."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Partha asked from Indra all his weapons. At
this Sakra of great splendour, having fixed the time for giving them, said,
"When the illustrious Madhava becomes pleased with thee, then, O son of
Pandu, I will give thee all my weapons! O prince of Kuru's race, I shall
know when the time cometh. Even for thy austere asceticism I will give
thee all my weapons of fire and all my Vayavya weapons, and thou also wilt
accept them all of me." Then Vasudeva asked that his friendship with
Arjuna might be eternal. The chief of the celestials granted unto the
intelligent Krishna the boon he desired. And having granted these boons
unto Krishna and Arjuna, the lord of the Maruts, accompanied by the
celestials, ascended to heaven, having also spoken to Hutasana (one whose
food is sacrificial butter). Agni also, having burnt that forest with its
animals and birds for five and ten days, became gratified and ceased to
burn. Having eaten flesh in abundance and drunk fat and blood, he became
highly gratified, and addressing Achyuta and Arjuna said, "I have been
gratified by you two tigers among men. At my command, ye heroes, ye shall
be competent to go wheresoever ye choose!" Thus addressed by the
illustrious Agni, Arjuna and Vasudeva and the Danava Maya also--these
three,--having wandered a little at last sat themselves down on the
delightful banks of a river.'"

END OF ADI PARVA







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana
Vyasa - Adi Parva, by Kisari Mohan Ganguli

