nor slothful nor cowardly in its discharge.

May I say a word here about the grounds on which this obligation to
witness rests for us? If Jesus Christ had never said, 'Go ye into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature,' it would not
have made a bit of difference as to the imperative duty that is laid
upon all Christian men; for that arises, not from that command,
which only gives voice to a previous obligation, but it flows, from
the very nature of things, from the message that we receive from our
links with other men and from the constitution and make of our own
natures.

It flows directly from the gift that we have received. There are
plenty of truths which, _per se_, carry with them no obligation
to impart them. But any truth in which is wrapped up the possible
happiness of another man, any truth which bears upon moral or
spiritual subjects, carries with it the strongest obligation to
impart it. We have such large insights into God and His love as the
Gospel gives us, not that we may eat our morsel alone, or merely sun
ourselves in the light, and expatiate in the warmth of the beams
that come to us, but that we may share them with all around: 'God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness  hath shined into
our hearts,' that we may 'give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.'

The obligation arises from the links that knit us all together. 'Am
I my brother's keeper?' Why, the question answers itself. If he is
_your_ 'brother,' you are certainly _his_ 'keeper.' And you cannot
shuffle off the obligation by any irrelevant pitting of one field of
Christian work against another; still less by any criticism, hostile
or friendly, as it may be, of the methods of Christian work, or of the
parity and elevation of the character and motives of the workers.
Humanity is one, linked by a mystic chain, and every link of it should
thrill by a common impulse; and through all the members there should
circulate a common life. That great thought is one of the gains that
the Gospel has brought us, and in the presence of it and our indebtedness
and obligation to every man, woman, and child that bears the form of
man, all geographical limits to Christian witnessing seem supremely
absurd and incongruous. You cannot get rid of your obligation by saying,
'I do not care about foreign missions, I go in for home ones.' And you
cannot get rid of it by chiming in an ignorant second to the talk
that has been going on lately, carping at or criticising methods of
work. It would be a very strange thing if we had hit all at once, in
the very beginning of an enterprise, upon the best of all possible
methods; and it would be a very strange thing if the mission-field
is the only one where there are no lazy workers and selfish motives
and unworthy occupants of high places. All that is true about home
as it is about other places. But grant it all, and back comes the
obligation based upon the nature of the truth that we have received,
upon our links with our brethren, and upon our loyalty to our
Master, and it peals into the ears of every Christian man and woman:
'Thou art a witness of these things'; and 'to this end wert thou
born again, that thou mightest bear witness to the truth.'

Ah, brethren! the issues of faithfulness to that high function are
sweet and blessed and wonderful. A witnessing Christian will be a
believing Christian; for there is no surer way to deepen my own
convictions about any moral or spiritual truth than to constitute
myself their humble servant to proclaim them. Whosoever is a
believer should be an apostle, and if he is an apostle he will be
tenfold a believer. There is nothing which will give a man a firmer
grasp of the Gospel for his own soul than when he finds that,
ministered by his humble efforts, it produces in other hearts the
same effects which he finds it working upon himself. There is no
page in the great book of the evidences of the truth of Christianity
more conclusive than that which in the last century has been written
by the experience of Christian missions. Let the objectors, Jannes
and Jambres, who withstood Moses, let them do the same with their
enchantments, and then we will discuss the questions of the truth of
the Gospel with them.

Nor need I do more than remind you of the highest of all blessed
issues which is yet to come. 'Be thou faithful unto death and I will
give thee a crown of life.' Alas! alas! how many of us professing
Christians will have to stand at last without that 'crown of
rejoicing' which they wear who, by their poor work and witness, have
won some souls to the Master. Do you, Christian men, contemplate
entering heaven alone, or bringing your sheaves with you? It will be
sad to stand with hands empty then, because they were idle in the
days of the seed-basket and the reaping-hook, whilst those that
sowed and those that reaped shall rejoice together. 'Ye are the
witnesses of these things': see to it that you do your work.

II. And now, secondly, and briefly, note the equipment of the
witnesses for their task.

Our Lord here distinguishes two stages in the endowment. Then and
there they receive the gift of the Divine Spirit, as is more fully
recorded in John's account of these last days, but that gift, rich
and precious as it was, was not yet the full bestowment which they
needed for their task. That came on the day of Pentecost. Mark the
vivid and picturesque word which our Lord here employs: 'Until ye be
_clothed_ with power from on high.' That divine gift coming
down as a vesture, wraps and covers and hides their own weakness,
their own naked and poor personality.

I can only say a word or two about this matter. The same collocation
of ideas--a witnessing Spirit by whose indwelling energy the
Christian community becomes witnesses, is found (and has been
explained at length by me in former discourses) in the farewell
words of our Lord in the upper chamber. 'The Spirit of Truth which
proceedeth from the Father, He shall bear witness of Me, and ye also
shall bear witness because ye have been with Me from the beginning.'

I need only remark here that the only power by which Christians can
discharge their work of witnessing in the world is the power which
clothes them from above. The new life which Jesus Christ brings and
gives to us is the only life which will avail for discharging this
office. Our self-will, the old life of nature, with all its
dependence upon ourselves, is nought in reference to this task. But
when that divine spark enters into men's hearts, then natural
endowments are heightened into supernatural gifts, and new forces
are developed, and new powers are bestowed and the earthen vessel is
filled with new treasure. Without it--and  there is a great deal of
so-called Christian witnessing to-day without it--noise,
advertising, skill in getting up externals, and all the other
unworthy methods which Christian churches sometimes stoop to adopt,
are powerless, as they ought to be. You may accomplish a great deal
by fussy activity which calls itself Christian earnestness, and has
not God's Spirit in it. But it is no more growth than are what the
children call 'devil's puff-balls' which they find in the fields in
these autumn mornings; and it will go up in poisonous, brown dust
like these when it is pricked.

The one condition of Christian churches doing their Christian work
is that they shall be clothed and filled with God's Spirit. Do not
let us rely on machinery; do not let us rely on externals; do not
let us rely on advertising tricks which might do very well for a
cheap shop, but are all out of harmony with the work that we have to
do; but let us rely on this, and on this alone. Holding converse
with God and Christ, we shall come out of the secret place of the
Most High with our faces glowing with the communion, and our lips on
fire to proclaim the sweetnesses that lie within the shrine.

One word more and I have done. This clothing with the Spirit, which
is the only fitness of the Church for its witnessing work, is only
to be won by much solitary waiting. 'Tarry ye,' or as in the
original it stands even more vividly, _'Sit ye still_ in the
city ... till ye be clothed.' It is because so many Christian
workers are so seldom alone with Christ that so much of their work
is nought, and comes to nought. To draw apart from outward activity
into the solitary place, and sit with Him, is the only means by
which we can keep up the freshness of our own spirits, and be fit
for His service. Mary was being trained for Martha's work when she
sat at Christ's feet; but Martha could not do hers without being
'troubled and careful,' because she was more accustomed to the work
than to the communion that would have made it light.

So, Christian friends, behold your task and your equipment. I
beseech you, who call yourselves Christ's servants, to lay to heart
your plain and unavoidable obligations. If you have found Jesus, you
are as truly and as individually bound to proclaim Him as if a
definite and direct divine command sounded in your ears. Your
possession of the Gospel as the food of your own souls binds you to
impart it to all the famished. The call to witness comes as straight
to you as it did to the young Pharisee on the road to Damascus when
he heard 'Saul! Saul!' called from the sky.

May you and I answer as he did, 'Lord! what wilt Thou have _me_
to do!'




THE ASCENSION


    'And He led them out as far as to Bethany, and He
    lifted up His hands, and blessed them. 51. And it
    came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted
    from them, and carried up into heaven.'
    --LUKE xxiv. 50, 51.

    'And when He had spoken these things, while they
    beheld, He was taken up; and a cloud received Him
    out of their sight.'--ACTS i. 9.

Two of the four Evangelists, viz., Matthew and John, have no record
of the Ascension. But the argument which infers ignorance from
silence, which is always rash, is entirely discredited in this case.
It is impossible to believe that Matthew, who wrote as the last word
of his gospel the great words, 'All power is given unto Me in heaven
and in earth ... lo! I am with you alway....' was ignorant of the
fact which alone makes these words credible. And it is equally
impossible to believe that the Evangelist who recorded the tender
saying to Mary, 'Go to My brethren, and say unto them I ascend to My
Father, and your Father,' was ignorant of its fulfilment. The
explanation of the silence is to be sought in a quite different
direction. It comes from the fact that to the Evangelists, rightly,
the Ascension was but the prolongation and the culmination of the
Resurrection. That being recorded, there was no need for the
definite record of this.

There is another singular point about these records, viz., that Luke
has two accounts, one in the end of his gospel, one in the beginning
of Acts; and that these two accounts are obviously different. The
differences have been laid hold of as a weapon with which to attack
the veracity of both accounts. But there again a little
consideration clears the path. The very places in which they
respectively occur might have solved the difficulty, for the one is
at the end of a book, and the other is at the beginning of a book;
and so, naturally, the one regards the Ascension as the end of the
earthly life, and the other as the beginning of the heavenly. The
one is all suffused with evening light; the other is radiant with
the promise of a new day. The one is the record of a tender
farewell, in the other the sense of parting has almost been absorbed
in the forward look to the new phase of relationship which is to
begin. If Luke had been a secular biographer, the critics would have
been full of admiration at the delicacy of his touch, and the
fineness of keeping in the two narratives, the picture being the
same in both, and the scheme of colouring being different. But as he
is only an Evangelist, they fall foul of him for his 'discrepancies.'
It is worth our while to take both his points of view.

But there is another thing to be remembered, that, as the appendix
of his account of the Ascension in the book of the Acts, Luke tells
us of the angel's message;--'This  same Jesus ... shall ... return.'
So there are three points of view which have to be combined in order
to get the whole significance of that mighty fact: the Ascension as
an end; the Ascension as a beginning; the Ascension as the pledge of
the return. Now take these three points.

I. We have the aspect of the Ascension as an end.

The narrative in Luke's gospel, in its very brevity, does yet
distinctly suggest that retrospective and valedictory tone. Note
how, for instance, we are told the locality--'He led them out as far
as Bethany.' The name at once strikes a chord of remembrance. What
memories clustered round it, and how natural it was that the parting
should take place there, not merely because the crest of the Mount
of Olives hid the place from the gaze of the crowded city; but
because it was within earshot almost of the home where so much of
the sweet earthly fellowship, that was now to end, had passed. The
same note of regarding the scene as being the termination of those
blessed years of dear and familiar intercourse is struck in the
fact, so human, so natural, so utterly inartificial, that He lifted
His hands to bless them, moved by the same impulse with which so
often we have wrung a hand at parting, and stammered, 'God bless
you!' And the same valedictory hue is further deepened by the fact
that what Luke puts first is not the Ascension, but the parting. 'He
was parted from them,' that is the main fact; 'and He was carried up
into heaven,' comes almost as a subordinate one. At all events it is
regarded mainly as being the medium by which the parting was
effected.

So the aspect of the Ascension thus presented is that of a tender
farewell; the pathetic conclusion of three long, blessed years. And
yet that is not all, for the Evangelist adds a very enigmatic word:
'They returned to Jerusalem with great joy.' Glad because He had
gone? No. Glad merely because He had gone up? No. The saying is a
riddle, left at the end of the book, for readers to ponder, and is a
subtle link of connection with what is to be written in the next
volume, when the aspect of the Ascension as an end is subordinate,
and its aspect as a beginning is prominent. So regarded, it filled
the disciples with joy. Thus you see, I think, that without any
illegitimate straining of the expressions of the text, we do come to
the point of view from which, to begin with, this great event must
be looked at. We have to take the same view, and to regard that
Ascension not only as the end of an epoch of sweet friendship, but
as the solemn close and culmination of the whole earthly life. I
have no time to dwell upon the thoughts that come crowding into
one's mind when we take that point of view. But let me suggest, in
the briefest way, one or two of them.

Here is an end which circles round to, and is of a piece with, the
beginning. 'I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world; again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father.' The
Ascension corresponds with, and meets the miracle of, the
Incarnation. And as the Word who became flesh, came by the natural
path of human birth, and entered in through the gate by which we all
enter, and yet came as none else has come, by His own will, in the
miracle of His Incarnation, so at the end, He passed out from life
through the gate by which we all pass, and 'was obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross,' and yet He passed likewise on a path
which none but Himself has trod, and ascended up to heaven, whence
He had descended to earth. He came into the world, not as leaving
the Father, for He is 'the Son of Man which is in heaven,' and He
ascended up on high, not as leaving us, for He is 'with us alway,
even to the end of the world.' Thus the Incarnation and the
Ascension support each other.

But let me remind you how, in this connection, we have the very same
combination of lowliness and gentleness with majesty and power which
runs through the whole of the story of the earthly life of Jesus
Christ. Born in a stable, and waited on by angels, the subject of
all the humiliations of humanity, and flashing forth through them
all the power of divinity, He ascends on high at last, and yet with
no pomp nor visible splendour to the world, but only in the presence
of a handful of loving hearts, choosing some dimple of the hill
where its folds hid them from the city. As He came quietly and
silently into the world, so quietly and silently He passed thence.
In this connection there is more than the picturesque contrast
between the rapture of Elijah, with its whirlwind, and chariot of
fire and horses of fire, and the calm, slow rising, by no external
medium raised, of the Christ. It was fit that the mortal should be
swept up into the unfamiliar heaven by the pomp of angels and the
chariot of fire. It was fit that when Jesus ascended to His 'own
calm home, His habitation from eternity,' there should be nothing
visible but His own slowly rising form, with the hands uplifted, to
shed benediction on the heads of the gazers beneath.

In like manner, regarding the Ascension as an end, may we not say
that it is the seal of heaven impressed on the sacrifice of the
Cross? 'Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a
Name, which is above every name; that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow.' We find in that intimate connection between the
Cross and the Ascension, the key to the deep saying which carries
references to both in itself, when the Lord spoke of Himself as
being lifted up and drawing all men unto Him. The original primary
reference no doubt was to His elevation on the Cross, 'as Moses
lifted up the serpent.' But the final, and at the time of its being
spoken, the mysterious, reference was to the fact that in descending
to the depth of humiliation He was rising to the height of glory.
The zenith of the Ascension is the rebound from the nadir of the
Cross. The lowliness of the stoop measures the loftiness of the
elevation, and the Son of Man was glorified at the moment when the
Son of Man was most profoundly abased. The Cross and the Ascension,
if I might use so violent a figure, are like the twin stars, of
which the heavens present some examples, one dark and lustreless,
one flashing with radiancy of light, but knit together by an
invisible vinculum, and revolving round a common centre. When He
'parted from them, and was carried up into heaven,' He ended the
humiliation which caused the elevation.

And then, again, I might suggest that, regarded in its aspect as an
end, this Ascension is also the culmination and the natural
conclusion of the Resurrection. As I have said, the Scripture point
of view with reference to these two is not that they are two, but
that the one is the starting point of the line of which the other is
the goal. The process which began when He rose from the dead,
whatever view we may take of the condition of His earthly life
during the forty days of parenthesis, could have no rational and
intelligible ending, except the Ascension. Thus we should think of
it not only as the end of a sweet friendship, but as the end of the
gracious manifestation of the earthly life, the counterpart of the
Incarnation and descent to earth, the end of the Cross and the
culmination of the Resurrection. The Son of Man, the same that also
descended into the lowest parts of the earth, ascended up where He
was before.

Now let us turn to the other aspect which the Evangelist gives, when
He ceases to be an Evangelist, and becomes a Church Historian.
_Then_ he considers

II. The Ascension as a beginning.

The place which it holds in the Acts of the Apostles explains the
point of view from which it is to be regarded. It is the foundation
of everything that the writer has afterwards to say. It is the basis
of the Church. It is the ground of all the activity which Christ's
servants put forth. Not only its place explains this aspect of it,
but the very first words of the book itself do the same. 'The former
treatise have I made ... of all that Jesus began both to do and
teach'--and now I am to tell you of an Ascension, and of all that
Jesus continued to do and teach. So that the book is the history of
the work of the Lord, who was able to do that work, just because He
had ascended up on high. The same impression is produced if we
ponder the conversation which precedes the account of the Ascension
in the book of Acts, which, though it touches the same topics as are
touched by the words that precede the account in the Gospel, yet
presents them in a different aspect, and suggests the endowments
with which the Christian community is to be invested, and the work
which therefore it is to do, in consequence of the Ascension of
Jesus Christ. The Apostle Peter had caught that thought when, on the
day of Pentecost, he said, 'He, being exalted to the right hand of
the Father, hath shed forth this which ye see and hear,' and
throughout the whole book the same point of view is kept up. 'The
work that is done upon earth He doeth it all Himself.'

So there is in _this_ narrative nothing about parting, there is
nothing about blessing. There is simply the ascending up and the
significant addition of the reception into the cloud, which, whilst
He was yet plainly visible, and not dwindled by distance into a
speck, received Him out of their sight. The cloud was the symbol of
the Divine Presence, which had hung over the Tabernacle, which had
sat between the cherubim, which had wrapped the shepherds and the
angels on the hillside, which had come down in its brightness on the
Mount of Transfiguration, and which now, as the symbol of the Divine
Presence, received the ascending Lord, in token to the men that
stood gazing up into heaven, that He had passed to the right hand of
the Majesty on high.

Thus we have to think of that Ascension as being the groundwork and
foundation of all the world-wide and age-long energy which the
living Christ is exercising to-day. As one of the other Evangelists,
or at least, the appendix to his gospel, puts it, He ascended up on
high, and 'they went everywhere preaching the word, the Lord also
working with them, and confirming the word with signs following.' It
is the ascended Christ who sends the Spirit upon men; it is the
ascended Christ who opens men's hearts to hear; it is the ascended
Christ who sends forth His messengers to the Gentiles; it is the
ascended Christ who, to-day, is the energy of all the Church's
powers, the whiteness of all the Church's purity, the vitality of
all the Church's life. He lives, and therefore, there is a Christian
community on the face of the earth. He lives, and therefore it will
never die.

So we, too, have to look to that risen Lord as being the power by
which alone any of us can do either great or small work in His
Church. That Ascension is symbolically put as being to 'the right
hand of God.' What is the right hand of God? The divine omnipotence.
Where is it? Everywhere. What does sitting at the right hand of God
mean? Wielding the powers of omnipotence. And so He says, 'All power
is given unto Me'; and He is working a work to-day, wider in its
aspects than, though it be the application and consequence of, the
work upon the Cross. He cried there, 'It is finished!' but 'the work
of the ascended Jesus' will never be finished until 'the kingdoms
of this world are become the kingdom of our God and of His Christ.'

There are other aspects of His work in heaven which space will not
allow me to dwell upon, though I cannot but mention them. By the
Ascension Christ begins to prepare a place for us. How could any of
us stand in the presence of that eternal Light if He were not there?
We should be like some savage or rustic swept up suddenly and put
down in the middle of the glittering ring of courtiers round a
throne, unless we could lift our eyes and recognise a known and
loving face there. Where Christ is, I can be. He has taken one human
nature up into the Glory, and other human natures will therefore
find in it a home.

The ascended Christ, to use the symbolism which one of the New
Testament writers employs for illustration of a thought far greater
than the symbol--has like a High Priest passed within the veil,
'there to appear in the presence of God for us.' And the
intercession which is far more than petition, and is the whole
action of that dear Lord who identifies as with Himself, and whose
mighty work is ever present before the divine mind as an element in
His dealings, that intercession is being carried on for ever for us
all. So, 'set your affection on things above, where Christ is,
sitting at the right hand of God.' So, expect His help in your work,
and do the work which He has left you to carry on here. So, face
death and the dim kingdoms beyond, without quiver and without doubt,
assured that where the treasure is, there the heart will be also;
and that where the Master is, there the servants who follow in His
steps will be also at last.

And now there is the third aspect here of

III. The Ascension as being the pledge of the return.

The two men in white apparel that stood by gently rebuked the gazers
for gazing into heaven. They would not have rebuked them for gazing,
if they could have seen Him, but to look into the empty heaven was
useless. And they added the reason why the heavens need not be
looked at, as long as there is the earth to stand on: 'For this same
Jesus whom ye have seen go into heaven shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen Him go.' Note the emphatic declaration of identity;
'this _same_ Jesus.' Note the use of the simple human name;
'this same _Jesus_,' and recall the thoughts that cluster round
it, of the ascended humanity, and the perpetual humanity of the
ascended Lord, 'the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever,' Note
also the strong assertion, of visible, corporeal return: 'Shall so
come in _like_ manner as ye have seen Him go.' That return is
no metaphor, no mere piece of rhetoric, it is not to be eviscerated
of its contents by being taken as a synonym for the diffusion of His
influence all over a regenerated race, but it points to the return
of the Man Jesus locally, corporeally, visibly. 'We believe that
Thou shalt come to be our Judge'; we believe that Thou wilt come to
take Thy servants home.

The world has not seen the last of Jesus Christ. Such an Ascension,
after such a life, cannot be the end of Him. 'As it is appointed
unto all men once to die, and after death the Judgment, so Christ
also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many, shall
appear the second time, without sin unto salvation.' As inevitably
as for sinful human nature judgment follows death, so inevitably for
the sinless Man, who is the sacrifice for the world's sins, His
judicial return will follow His atoning work, and He will come
again, having received the Kingdom, to take account of His servants,
and to perfect their possession of the salvation which by His
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, He wrought for
the world.

Therefore, brethren, one sweet face, and one great fact--the face of
the Christ, the fact of the Cross--should fill the past. One sweet
face, one great fact--the face of the Christ, the fact of His
Presence with us all the days--should fill the present. One regal
face, one great hope, should fill the future; the face of the King
that sitteth upon the throne, the hope that He will come again, and
'so we shall be ever with the Lord.'


END OF VOL. II.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by
Alexander Maclaren

