found much favour in India, he continues, "I may, however, add that by
far the most formidable means which can be adopted for propagating such
ideas, or for rousing a desire for Islamic union, would be the
distribution of pamphlets to the pilgrims at Mecca. The annual Haj at
Mecca draws the more religious from all parts of India, and the Hajjis
on their return are treated with exceptional respect and visited by
their friends and neighbours, who naturally inquire about the latest
news and doctrines propounded in the Holy Cities; so that for the
dissemination of their views the most effective way would be for the
propagandists to bring the Hajjis under their influence. I call it
_effective_, because the influence of what the Hajjis say goes to the
remotest villages of the Mofussil." He then advocates as a
counter-acting influence the undertaking by Government of the transport
of the Haj to Jeddah, and the appointment of an agent, a native of
India, to look after their interests while in the Holy Land. "By
making," he concludes, "the arrangements I have suggested, the English
Government will gain, not only the good-will of the whole Mohammedan
population of India, but they will also inspire the Hajjis with the
wholesome feeling that they owe allegiance to, and can claim protection
from, an empire other than that to which the people of Arabia are
subject (the Turkish).

"The proposed help would stand in very favourable contrast to the
sufferings which the pilgrims undergo from maladministration at Mecca
and in their journey to Medina. Moreover, practically the assistance
rendered by the Government would be the most effective way of resisting
such influences as the propagandists might bring to bear upon the Hajjis
with a view to animate them with hostility to the British supremacy in
India.... I believe if the Indian Government only wished to make some
such arrangement it would pay its own way. I am absolutely certain that
it would have a disproportionately beneficial effect on the political
feelings of the Mohammedans towards British rule."

Such, or some such, is the line of action which England, looking merely
to her own interests, may, it is hoped, pursue in the next century, and
begin in this. Her Asiatic interests she must recognize to be peace and
security in Mussulman India, good-will in Egypt, and the healthy growth
of the humaner thought of Islam everywhere; and these she can only
secure by occupying the position marked out for her by Providence of
leading the Mohammedan world in its advance towards better things. The
mission is a high one, and well worthy of her acceptance, and the means
at her disposal are fully sufficient for its discharge. Nor will her
refusal, if she refuse, be without grave and immediate danger. The
Mohammedan world is roused as it has never been in its history to a
sense of its political and moral dangers, and is looking round on all
sides for a leader of whatsoever name or nation to espouse its cause. We
can hardly doubt that the position of directing so vast a force, if
abandoned by England, will be claimed by some more resolute neighbour.

The British Empire in Asia is cause of envy to the world at large, and
its prosperity has many enemies, who will certainly make the distress of
Islam an engine in their hands against it. Neglected by the power which
they hold bound to protect their interest, the Mussulmans of India will
certainly become its bitterest enemies, and though they may not
immediately be able to give effect to their hostility, the day of
embarrassment for us can hardly fail to come, and with it their
opportunity. At best the enmity of Islam will make the dream of
reconciling the Indian populations to our rule for ever an
impossibility. Leaders they will look for elsewhere--in Russia, maybe,
in Germany, or even France, jealous of our interests in Egypt--not
leaders such as we might have been for their good, but for our evil, and
in pursuance of their own designs. The Caliphate is a weapon forged for
any hand--for Russia's at Bagdad, for France's at Damascus, or for
Holland's (call it one day Germany's) in our stead at Mecca. Protected
by any of these nations the Caliphate might make our position
intolerable in India, filling up for us the measure of Mussulman
bitterness, of which we already are having a foretaste in the
Pan-islamic intrigues at Constantinople.

But enough of this line of reasoning, which after all is selfish and
unworthy. The main point is, that England should fulfil the trust she
has accepted of developing, not destroying, the existing elements of
good in Asia. She cannot destroy Islam, nor dissolve her own connection
with her. Therefore, in God's name, let her take Islam by the hand and
encourage her boldly in the path of virtue. This is the only worthy
course, and the only wise one, wiser and worthier, I venture to assert,
than a whole century of crusade.

In conclusion, I would say to Mohammedans that if I have drawn a gloomy
picture of their immediate political fortunes, it is not that I despair
even of these. Their day of empire in the world seems over, but their
day of self-rule may well dawn again, though under changed conditions
from any we now witness. I foresee for them the spiritual inheritance of
Africa and Southern Asia, and as the intelligence of the races they
convert shall have risen to the level of their present rulers, and
Europe, weary of her work, shall have abandoned the task of Asiatic and
African government, the temporal inheritance too. How long this shall be
delayed we know not. Their prophet has foretold that Islam shall not
outlive two thousand years before the Mohdy shall come, and the thirteen
hundredth is just commencing; nor do I believe their deliverance will be
so very long delayed. A "man of justice" may yet restore their fortunes;
but it will hardly be by present violence or by wading to Mecca through
seas of blood; and when the end of their humiliation shall have come,
it may be found that his true mission has commenced already, and that
the battle he was to fight has been long waging in the hearts of those
who have striven to reform their ways and purify their law, rather than
lament their broken power and the corrupt vanities of their temporal
empire.

THE END.

FOOTNOTES:

[18] The Arabs believe that the Beni Ghassan, the Christian Bedouin
tribe which opposed the Caliph Omar, migrated to Great Britain on the
Mohammedan conquest of Syria.

[19] Since this was written astonishing evidence of political vitality
has been given to Europe by Egypt, and there is now, I trust, little
doubt that she will be left to work out her salvation in her own way.
The phenomenon opens too large a vista to the imagination to be treated
of in a note, but the Author would invite attention to it as a fact
worthy of more consideration than all his arguments.




PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Future of Islam, by Wilfred Scawen Blunt

