idle bellies.  They and we might easily be brought to atonement; touching
all these matters, were it not that ambition, gluttony, and excess did
let it.  Hence cometh their whining, their heart is on their halfpenny.
Out of doubt their clamours and stirs be to none other end, but to
maintain more shamefully and naughtily ill-gotten things.

Nowadays the pardoners complain of us, the dataries, the pope's
collectors, the bawds, and others which take gain to be godliness, and
serve not Jesus Christ but their own bellies.  Many a day ago, and in the
old world, a wonderful great advantage grew hereby to these kinds of
people.  But now they reckon, all is lost unto them, that Christ gaineth.
The pope himself maketh a great complaint at this present, that charity
in people is waxen cold.  And why so, trow ye?  Forsooth, because his
profits decay more and more.  And for this cause doth he hale us into
hatred, all that ever he may, laying load upon us with despiteful
railings, and condemning us for heretics, to the end, they that
understand not the matter may think there be no worse men upon earth than
we be.  Notwithstanding, we in the mean season are never the more ashamed
for all this; neither ought we to be ashamed of the gospel.  For we set
more by the glory of God, than we do by the estimation of men.  We are
sure all is true that we teach, and we may not either go against our own
conscience, or bear any witness against God.  For if we deny any part of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ before men, He on the other side will deny us
before His Father.  And if there be any that will still be offended, and
cannot endure Christ's doctrine, such, say we, be blind, and leaders of
the blind; the truth, nevertheless, must be preached and preferred above
all, and we must with patience wait for God's judgment.  Let these folk,
in the meantime, take good heed what they do, and let them be well
advised of their own salvation, and cease to hate and persecute the
Gospel of the Son of God, for fear lest they feel Him once a redresser
and revenger of His own cause.  God will not suffer Himself to be made a
mocking stock.  The world espieth a good while agone what there is a
doing abroad.  This flame, the more it is kept down, so much the more
with greater force and strength doth it break out and fly abroad.  Their
unfaithfulness shall not disappoint God's faithful promise.  And if they
shall refuse to lay away this their hardness of heart, and to receive the
Gospel of Christ, then shall publicans and sinners go before them into
the kingdom of Heaven.

God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ open the eyes of them all,
that they may be able to see that blessed hope, whereunto they have been
called; so as we may altogether in one glorify Him alone, who is the true
God, and also that same Jesus Christ, whom He sent down to us from
Heaven, unto whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be given all
honour and glory everlastingly.  So be it.



