    Sixty thousand leagues in length, all unweary, full of wrath,
    Through the centre, in their strength, clove they down their hellward path.'

The gods, expecting the whole frame of the world, thus undermined, to
perish in total ruin, assemble around Brahma to implore his
interposition. He informs them that Vishnu, in the form of Kapila, has
been the robber of the horse, and that in due time the god will avenge
himself. From Patala, the hell of Indian mythology, the Sagaridae
recommence their impious and destructive work.

    'And downward dug they many a rood, and downward till they
    saw aghast, Where the earth-bearing elephant stood, ev'n like
    a mountain tall and vast. 'Tis he whose head aloft sustains
    the broad earth's forest-clothed round, With all its vast and
    spreading plains, and many a stately city crown'd. If
    underneath the o'erbearing load bows down his weary head,
    'tis then The mighty earthquakes are abroad, and shaking down
    the abodes of men. Around earth's pillar moved they slowly,
    and thus in humble accents blest Him the lofty and the holy,
    that bears the region of the East. And southward dug they
    many a rood, until before their shuddering sight, The next
    earth-bearing elephant stood, huge Mahapadmas' mountain
    height. Upon his head earth's southern bound, all full of
    wonder, saw they rest. Slow and awe-struck paced they round,
    and him, earth's southern pillar, blest. Westward then their
    work they urge, king Sagara's six myriad race, Unto the vast
    earth's western verge, and there in his appointed place The
    next earth-bearing elephant stood, huge Saumanasa's mountain
    crest; Around they paced in humble mood, and in like
    courteous phrase addrest, And still their weary toil endure,
    and onward dig until they see Last earth-bearing Himapandure,
    glorying in his majesty.'

At length they reach the place where Vishnu appears in the form of
Kapila, with the horse feeding near him; a flame issues forth from the
indignant deity, and the six myriad sons of Sagara become a heap of
ashes.

The adventure devolves on the youthful Ansuman, who achieves it with
perfect success; Vishnu permits him to lead away the steed, but the
ashes of his brethren cannot be purified by earthly water; the goddess
Ganga must first be brought to earth, and, having undergone lustration
from that holy flood, the race of Sagara are to ascend to heaven. Yet
a long period elapses; and it is not till the reign of the virtuous
Bhagiratha, that Brahma is moved by his surpassing penance to grant
the descent of Ganga from heaven. King Bhagiratha had taken his stand
on the top of Gokarna, the sacred peak of the Himavan, (the Himalaya,)
and here

    'Stands with arms outstretch'd on high, amid five blazing fires, the one
    Towards each quarter of the sky, the fifth the full meridian sun.
    Mid fiercest frosts on snow he slept, the dry and withered leaves his food,
    Mid rains his roofless vigil kept, the soul and sense alike subdued.'

His prayers are irresistible; but Brahma forewarns him, that the
unbroken descent of Ganga from heaven would be so overpowering, that
the earth would be unable to sustain it, and Siva must be propitiated,
in order that he may receive on his head the precipitous cataract.
Under this wild and unwieldy allegory appears to lurk an obscure
allusion to the course of the Ganges among the summits, and under the
forests of the Himalaya, which are the locks of Siva.

    'High on the top of Himavan the mighty Mashawara stood;
    And "Descend," he gave the word to the heaven-meandering water--
    Full of wrath, the mandate heard Himavan's majestic daughter.
    To a giant's stature soaring and intolerable speed,
    From heaven's height down rush'd she pouring upon Siva's sacred head.
    Him the goddess thought in scorn with her resistless might to sweep
    By her fierce waves o'erborne, down to hell's remotest deep.'

Siva, in his turn enraged, resists her fury.

    'Down on Sankara's holy head, down the holy fell, and there
    Amid the entangling meshes spread, of his loose and flowing hair.
    Vast and boundless as the woods upon the Himalaya's brow,
    Nor ever may the struggling floods rush headlong to the earth below.
    Opening, egress was not there, amid those winding, long meanders.
    Within that labyrinthine hair, for many an age the goddess wanders.'

The king again has recourse to his penances, Siva is propitiated, and
the stream by seven[159] channels finds its way to the plains of India.
The spirit and the luxuriance of the description which follows, of the
king leading the way, and the obedient waters rolling after his car,
appear to us of a high order of poetry.

    'Up the raja at the sign upon his glittering chariot leaps,
    Instant Ganga the divine follows his majestic steps, From the
    high heaven burst she forth first on Siva's lofty crown,
    Headlong then and prone to earth thundering rushed the
    cataract down. Swarms of bright-hued fish came dashing;
    turtles, dolphins in their mirth, Fallen or falling,
    glancing, flashing, to the many gleaming earth. And all the
    host of heaven came down, spirits and genii, in amaze, And
    each forsook his heavenly throne, upon that glorious scene to
    gaze. On cars, like high tower'd cities, seen, with elephants
    and coursers, rode, Or on soft swinging palanquin, lay
    wondering each observant god. As met in bright divan each
    god, and flash'd their jewell'd vestures' rays, The
    coruscating aether glow'd, as with a hundred suns ablaze. And
    with the fish and dolphins gleaming, and scaly crocodiles and
    snakes, Glanc'd the air, as when fast streaming the blue
    lightning shoots and breaks: And in ten thousand sparkles
    bright went flashing up the cloudy spray, The snowy flocking
    swans less white, within its glittering mists at play. And
    headlong now poured down the flood, and now in silver
    circlets wound, Then lakelike spread all bright and broad,
    then gently, gently flowed around, Then 'neath the cavern'd
    earth descending, then spouted up the boiling tide, Then
    stream with stream harmonious blending, swell bubbling up or
    smooth subside. By that heaven-welling water's breast, the
    genii and the sages stood, Its sanctifying dews they blest,
    and plung'd within the lustral flood. Whoe'er beneath the
    curse of heaven from that immaculate world had fled, To th'
    impure earth in exile driven, to that all-holy baptism sped;
    And purified from every sin, to the bright spirit's bliss
    restor'd, Th' etherial sphere they entered in, and through
    th' empyreal mansions soar'd. The world in solemn jubilee
    behold these heavenly waves draw near, From sin and dark
    pollution free, bathed in the blameless waters clear. Swift
    king Bhagiratha drave upon his lofty glittering car, And
    swift with her obeisant wave bright Ganga followed him afar.'

[Footnote 159: Schlegel supposes the three western streams to be the
Indus, which appears under its real name the Sind, the Iaxartes, and
the Oxus; are not the Sareswatie, or perhaps the Sutlej, under the
name of Sita, and the Jumna meant? Of the eastern branches, it is not
difficult to fix the Burhampooter. Schlegel suggests the Irawaddy, and
the Blue River of China. Why not the Alacananda and the Gogra? The
main stream bears the name of the Bhaghiratha, till it joins the
Alacananda and takes the name of the Ganges.]


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Nala and Damayanti and Other Poems, by
Henry Hart Milman

