
**The Sequel**.

32. The sequel of the Great Apostasy is the Restoration of the Gospel,
marking the inauguration of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.
This epoch-making event occurred in the early part of the nineteenth
century, when the Father and the Son manifested themselves to man, and
when the Holy Priesthood with all its powers and authority was again
brought to earth.

33. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims to the
world this glorious restoration,--at once the consummation of the work
of God throughout the ages past, and the final preparation for the
second advent of Jesus, the Christ. The Church affirms that after the
long night of spiritual darkness, the light of heaven has again come;
and that the Church of Christ is authoritatively established. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands alone in the
declaration that the Holy Priesthood is operative upon earth, not as
an inheritance through earthly continuation from the apostolic age,
but as the endowment of a new dispensation, brought to earth by
heavenly ministration. In this restoration, divinely predicted and
divinely achieved, has been witnessed a realization of the Revelator's
vision:

"_And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud
voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment
is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
the fountains of waters_."--(Rev. 14:6, 7. For treatment of the
Restoration of the Gospel see the Author's "Articles of Faith,"
Lecture 11. See Notes 4 and 5, end of chapter.)


NOTES.

1. _Papist Testimony to the Corruption of the Church_. "The judicious
student of ecclesiastical history will observe that I constantly
endeavor to draw my proofs from the most unexceptionable sources. For
example: To prove the corrupt state of the clergy, and the abominable
practices of the Roman See, I would produce the evidence of George of
Saxony, a most bigoted papist, whom the Roman Catholics always reckon
among the most sincere and most active of the holy defenders of their
religion. Now, as with them the assertions of Luther and the other
reformers go for nothing but exaggerations, misrepresentations, or
direct falsehoods, let them listen at least to this duke, their steady
friend and advocate, who generally, in religious concerns, opposed his
relation, the elector of Saxony, and who also entirely approved of
Luther's condemnation at Worms. This George of Saxony exhibited to the
Diet twelve heads of the grievances which called loudly for reform.
Two of these are briefly as follows: 1. Indulgences, which ought to be
obtained by prayers, fastings, benevolence towards our neighbor, and
other good works, are sold for money. Their value is extolled beyond
all decency. The sole object is to gain a deal of money. Hence the
preachers, who are bound to set forth truth, teach men nothing but
lies and frauds. They are not only suffered to go on thus, but are
well paid for their fraudulent harangues. The reason is the more
conviction they can produce among their hearers, the more money flows
into the chest. Rivers of scandalous proceedings arise from this
corrupt fountain. The officials of the bishops are equally attentive
to scrape money together. They vex the poor with their censures for
great crimes, as whoredom, adultery, blasphemy; but they spare the
rich. The clergy commit the very same crimes, and nobody censures
them. Faults which ought to be expiated by prayers and fastings are
atoned for by money, in order that the officials may pay large sums to
their respective bishops, and retain a portion of the gain for
themselves. Neither when a mulct is inflicted, is it done in a way to
stop the commission of the same fault in future, but rather so that
the delinquent understands he may soon do that very thing again,
provided he be but ready to pay. Hence, all the sacraments are sold
for money; and where that is not to be had, they are absolutely
neglected. 2. Another distinct head of the grievances produced by this
zealous duke was expressed thus: 'The scandalous conduct of the clergy
is a very fruitful source of the destruction of poor souls. There must
be a universal reformation; and this cannot be better effected than by
a general council. It is therefore, the most earnest wish of us all
that such a measure be adopted.'"--(Milner, "Church History," Cent.
XVI, ch. 6. Footnote.)

2. _Extremes Incident to the Reformation_. "What were the reproaches
constantly applied to the Reformation by its enemies? Which of its
results are thrown in its face, as it were, unanswerable? The two
principal reproaches are, first, the multiplicity of sects, the
excessive license of thought, the destruction of all spiritual
authority, and the entire dissolution of religious society; secondly,
tyranny and persecution. 'You provoke licentiousness,' it has been
said to the Reformers: 'you produce it; and, after being the cause of
it, you wish to restrain and repress it. And how do you repress it? By
the most harsh and violent means. You take upon yourselves, too, to
punish heresy, and that by virtue of an illegitimate authority.'"--
Guizot.

"The Sectarian dogma of Justification by Faith alone has exercised an
influence for evil since the early days of Christianity. The idea upon
which this pernicious doctrine was founded, was at first associated
with that of an absolute predestination, by which man was foredoomed
to destruction, or to an utterly undeserved salvation. Thus, Luther
taught as follows: 'The excellent, infallible, and sole preparation
for grace, is the eternal election and predestination of God.' 'Since
the fall of man, free-will is but an idle word.' 'A man who imagines
to arrive at grace by doing all that he is able to do, adds sins to
sin, and is doubly guilty.' 'That man is not justified who performs
many works; but he who without works has much faith in Christ.' (For
these and other doctrines of the Reformation see D'Aubigne's 'History
of the Reformation,' Vol. I, pp. 82, 83, 119, 122.) In Milner's
'Church History' (Vol. IV, p. 514) we read: 'The point which the
reformer Luther had most at heart in all his labors, contests and
dangers, was the justification by faith alone.' Melancthon voices the
doctrine of Luther in these words: 'Man's justification before God
proceeds from faith alone. This faith enters man's heart by the grace
of God alone;' and further, 'As all things which happen, happen
necessarily, according to the divine predestination, there is no such
thing as liberty in our wills.'--(D'Aubigne, Vol. III, p. 340.) It is
true that Luther strongly denounced, and vehemently disclaimed
responsibility for, the excesses to which this teaching gave rise, yet
he was not less vigorous in proclaiming the doctrine. Note his words:
'I, Doctor Martin Luther, unworthy herald of the doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ, confess this article, that faith alone without works
justifies before God; and I declare that it shall stand and remain
forever in despite of the emperor of the Romans, the emperor of the
Turks, the emperor of the Persians,--in spite of the pope and all the
cardinals, with the bishops, priests, monks and nuns,--in spite of
kings, princes and nobles, and in spite of all the world and of the
devils themselves; and that if they endeavor to fight against this
truth they will draw the fires of hell upon their heads. This is the
true and holy gospel, and the declaration of me, Doctor Luther,
according to the teachings of the Holy Ghost.'"--(See the Author's
"Articles of Faith," Lecture V, Note 2.)

3. _Diverse Views Concerning Continuance or Decline of Spiritual
Gifts_. "Protestant writers insist that the age of miracles closed
with the fourth or fifth century, and that after that the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost must not be looked for. Catholic
writers, on the other hand, insist that the power to perform miracles
has always continued in the Church; yet those spiritual manifestations
which they describe after the fourth and fifth centuries savor of
invention on the part of the priests, and childish credulity on the
part of the people; or else, what is claimed to be miraculous falls
short of the power and dignity of those spiritual manifestations which
the primitive Church was wont to witness. The virtues and prodigies,
ascribed to the bones and other relics of the martyrs and saints, are
puerile in comparison with the healings by the anointing with oil and
the laying on of hands, speaking in tongues, interpretations,
prophecies, revelations, casting out of devils in the name of Jesus
Christ; to say nothing of the gifts of faith, wisdom, knowledge,
discerning of spirits, etc.--common in the Church in the days of the
apostles--(I Cor. 12:8-10). Nor is there anything in the scriptures or
in reason that would lead one to believe that they were to be
discontinued. Still this plea is made by modern Christians--explaining
the absence of these spiritual powers among them--that the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were only intended to accompany
the proclamation of the gospel during the first few centuries, until
the Church was able to make its way without them, and they were to be
done away. It is sufficient to remark upon this that it is assumption
pure and simple, and stands without warrant either of scripture or
right reason; and proves that men had so far changed the religion of
Jesus Christ that it became a form of godliness without the power
thereof."--(B. H. Roberts, "Outlines of Ecclesiastical History," Part
II, Sec. 5:6-8.)

4. _Commentary on the Revelator's Vision of the Restoration_. It is
instructive to inquire into the interpretation given by biblical
students to the prophecy voiced by John the Revelator predicting the
advent of the angel "having the everlasting gospel." Dr. Clarke offers
the following reflections on the passage: "_And I saw another angel
fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel_: Whether
this angel means any more than a particular dispensation of providence
and grace, by which the gospel shall be rapidly sent through the whole
world; or whether it means any especial messenger, order of preachers,
people, or society of Christians, whose professed object it is to send
the gospel of the kingdom throughout the earth, we know not. But the
vision seems truly descriptive of a late institution, entitled 'The
British and Foreign Bible Society,' whose object it is to print and
circulate the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments through all the
habitable world, and in all the languages spoken on the face of the
earth."--(Clarke, "Bible Commentary," Rev. 14:6.)

The learned commentator is to be commended for his frank avowal as to
uncertainty regarding the precise interpretation of this scripture,
and for the provisional and tentative manner in which he indicates a
possible application to the wide distribution of the Holy Bible
through the efforts of a most worthy and influential society. It is to
be noted that Dr. Clarke wrote his famous commentary on the Bible
shortly before the actual restoration of the gospel through angelic
agency which resulted in the establishment of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. Of necessity his search for the
fulfillment of the prediction was unsatisfactory, and, indeed,
unsuccessful, inasmuch as the fulfillment had not then occurred. The
commendable work of the Bible Society was a preparation for the
fulfillment of the momentous prophecy, but not the fulfillment itself.

5. _Restoration of the Church_. "In the first ten centuries
immediately following the ministry of Christ, the authority of the
priesthood was lost from among men, and no human power could restore
it. But the Lord in His mercy provided for the re-establishment of His
Church in the last days, and for the last time, and prophets of olden
time foresaw this era of renewed enlightenment, and sang in joyous
tones of its coming."--(See Dan. 2:44, 45; 7:27; Matt. 24:14; Rev.
14:6-8.) "This restoration was effected by the Lord through the
prophet, Joseph Smith, who, together with Oliver Cowdery, in 1829,
received the Aaronic Priesthood under the hands of John the Baptist,
and later the Melchizedek Priesthood under the hands of the former-day
apostles, Peter, James and John. By the authority thus bestowed, the
Church has been again organized with all its former completeness, and
mankind once more rejoices in the priceless privileges of the counsels
of God. The Latter-day Saints declare their high claim to the true
Church organization, similar in all essentials to the organization
effected by Christ among the Jews; these people of the last days
profess to have the Priesthood of the Almighty, the power to act in
the name of God, which power commands respect both on earth and in
heaven."--(The Author, "Articles of Faith," Lecture 11:12.)








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Apostasy, by James E. Talmage

